IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE 19th CENTURY
TWO BROTHERS,
ORSON AND LORENZO FOWLER
MADE AND SOLD BUSTS
LIKE THIS ONE.
SUPPOSEDLY BY READING
THIS MAP OF THE HEAD AND FACE
YOU COULD EVALUATE
SOMEONE'S CHARACTER
AND PERSONALITY
EVEN PREDICT HIS BEHAVIOR.
HERE IS WHERE YOU WOULD LOOK
TO SEE IF HE HAD
SELFISH SENTIMENTS.
OVER HERE IS
DOMESTIC PROPENSITIES.
THIS ONE, OF COURSE,
IS FOR INTUITIVE REASONING
AND REFLECTIVE FACULTIES
MORAL AND RELIGIOUS SENTIMENTS
SELF-ESTEEM, POWER OF WILL.
THE SYSTEM IS CALLED PHRENOLOGY
AND IT WAS ONE OF
THE MORE POPULAR THEORIES
ABOUT HUMAN BEHAVIOR
AT THE TIME.
TOO BAD IT WASN'T BASED
ON SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE.
ACTUALLY, IT'S ONLY TOWARDS
THE END OF THE 19th CENTURY
THAT SCIENTISTS TURN THEIR GAZE
ON HUMAN BEHAVIOR--
TRADITIONALLY THE PROVINCE
OF PHILOSOPHERS, POETS
THESE SCIENTISTS TRIED TO MAKE
THE SEEMINGLY IRRATIONAL
RATIONAL.
THEY TRIED TO SORT OUT
WHAT IN HUMAN BEHAVIOR
IS FIXED AT BIRTH
AND WHAT IS LEARNED
THROUGH EXPERIENCE.
IT IS A JOURNEY THAT TWISTS
AND TURNS THROUGHOUT THE CENTURY
AS THEY AND WE GO
"IN SEARCH OF OURSELVES."
AT THE TURN OF THE CENTURY
DOCTE
MYSTERIES OF THE HUMAN MIND
ARE DRAWN TO THIS VENERABLE
HOSPITAL IN PARIS: SALPETRIERE.
BUILT AS AN ARSENAL
IN THE 16th CENTURY
SALPETRIERE IS ANYTHING
BUT AN ORDINARY HOSPITAL.
BY THE LATE 19th CENTURY
IT HAS BEEN TRANSFORMED
INTO THE LEADING CENTER
FOR THE STUDY OF A STRANGE
AND PERPLEXING MALADY--
HYSTERIA.
A MALADY WHICH BECOMES
THE PASSION
OF ITS IRON-WILLED DIRECTOR,
JEAN MARTIN CHARCOT.
CHARCOT, BY ALL ACCOUNTS
OF CONTEMPORARIES
WAS A COLDAUTHORITARIAN FIG
URE
AND THIS IS WHAT CAUSED HIM
TO BE CALLED THE NAPOLEON
OF THE NEUROSES.
Woman:
IN THE SALPETRIERE
THERE WAS A HUGE POPULATION
OF PATIENTS WHO SUFFER
ONE OF THE MURKIEST DISORDERS
STILL AROUND.
THAT WAS HYSTERIA.
AND IT WAS A NEW OPPORTUNITY.
IT WAS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR CHARCOT
TO BRING ALL THE SKILLS
HE HAD AS A NEUROLOGIST
TO FINALLY UNPACK THE SECRETS
OF ONE OF THE MOST
FRUSTRATING DISORDERS
FOR CLINICIANS OF THE TIME.
Osgood:
CHARCOT OBSERVES PATIENTS
WITH A DIZZYING ARRAY
OF-
SPASMS...
PARALYSIS...
BLINDNESS...
AMNESIA...
EVERY PHYSICAL AND BEHAVIORAL
ABNORMALITY IMAGINABLE
ALL WITHOUT A TRACEABLE CAUSE.
AT THE HEIGHT OF HIS CAREER
CHARCOT TURNS HIS FULL ATTENTION
TO HYSTERIA
CERTAIN HE CAN FIND ITS CAUSE.
HE IS NOT THE FIRST TO TRY.
Woman:
THE GREEKS BELIEVED
SED
Woman:
THEBY THE UTERUSVEDWAS CAU
BY THE UTERUS
AS AN UNATTACHED ORGAN
KIND OF LIKE A BEACH BALL
INSIDE THE BODY
AND SHIFTING AROUND.
SO THAT MONDAY
IT MIGHT BE IN YOUR NECK
AND TUESDAY
IT MIGHT BE IN YOUR WRIST
AND WEDNESDAY
IT MIGHT BE IN YOUR STOMACH.
AND WHEREVER THIS UTERUS
HAPPENED TO END UP
IT CREATED SYMPTOMS--
"THE WANDERING WOMB,"
AS THEY USED TO CALL IT.
HYSTERIA IS STILL TIED
TO FEMALE SEXUALITY.
MAKES HER ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE
IS WIDELY HELD.
"AFTER ALL," REMARKS ONE
OF CHARCOT?? COLLEAGUES
"HOW COULD MEN HAVE HYSTERIA?
THEY HAVE NO UTERUS."
Micale:
MANY DOCTORS OF THE TIME,
IN FACT
BELIEVED THAT HYSTERIA WASN'T
A REAL DISEASE AT ALL.
HYSTERIA THEY DISMISSED
AS ARTIFICIAL
OR SIMULATING BEHAVIOR
OR PERHAPS, WHENT APPEARED
IN FEMALE PATIENTS
AS A FORM OF SEXUAL PROMISCUITY
THAT WAS THEREFORE CONTEMPTIBLE
ON MORAL GROUNDS.
CHARCOT, HOWEVER, ARGUED
THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
OF HIS CAREER
THAT HYSTERIA, IN FACT
WAS A SUBJECT
OF LEGITIMATE SCIENTIFIC STUDY.
Osgood:
HYSTERIA CANNOT BE
A WOMAN'S DISEASE
BECAUSE MEN SUFFER, TOO.
CHARCOT BELIEVES INSTEAD
THAT A BRAIN DISEASE
CAUSES HYSTERIA
AND THAT ONLY CERTAIN PEOPLE
SUCCUMB TO IT--
THOSE FROM TAINTED STOCK.
IT IS PASSED DOWN
FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION.
YET CHARCOT IS NOT BOTHERED
WHEN HE CANNOT FIND HYSTERIA
IN THE EXTENDED FAMILIES
OF HIS PATIENTS.
Micale:
CHARCOT COULD ARGUE
THAT HYSTERIA COULD TRANSMUTE
INTO OTHER TOTALLY DIFFERENT
PATHOLOGICAL FORMS
SUCH AS EPILEPSY
OR PARKINSON'S DISEASE
OR MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS.
WITH THE HINDSIGHT
OF A HUNDRED YEARS, OF COURSE
THIS SEEMS
ABSOLUTELY RIDICULOUS.
THESE ARE TOTALLY SEPARATE
PATHOLOGICAL CATEGORIES
WITH DIFFERENT CAUSES
AND DIFFERENT COURSES
AND DIFFERENT THERAPEUTICS.
A HUNDRED YEARS AGO, HOWEVER
THEY WERE VERY INDISCRIMINATELY
LUMPED TOGETHER.
CHARCOT WAS GOING TO TAKE
THIS VAST AMORPHOUS WASTEBASKET
CATEGORY OF SYMPTOMS
THAT WAS CALLED HYSTERIA
ATION
OF EVERY CLINICIAN USTR
IN EVERY MAJOR HOSPITAL
FOR CENTURIES, EFFECTIVELY
AND HE WAS GOING TO REPLACE IT
WITH AN ELEGANT
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICALLY BASED MODEL
OF ITS ETIOLOGY AND COURSE.
HE WAS BASICALLY GOING
TO MAKE HYSTERIA LIE DOWN
AND REVEAL ITS LAWS.
Osgood:
NOW, C
OF HYSTERIA'S CAUSE
CHARCOT TURNS TO CATEGORIZING
ITS SYMPTOMS.
HE SKETCHES EVERY MOVEMENT
OF HIS PATIENTS
IN VIVID DETAIL.
WHEN THE NEW ART OF
SCIENTIFIC PHOTOGRAPHY APPEARS
CHARCOT FINDS
AN EVEN BETTER METHOD
TO CAPTURE THE NUANCES
OF BEHAVIOR.
HE HIRES A PHOTOGRAPHER
TO WORK FULL TIE
AT SALPETRIERE.
CHARCOT WAS AVISUEL.
HE LOVED TO SEE THINGS
WITH HIS EYE
AND SEE THEM IN SUCH A WAY
THAT HE COULD
THEN STUDY THEM EXACTLY.
AND PHOTOGRAPHY ENABLED YOU
TO STOP TIME.
THAT IS, IT ENABLED YOU
TO TAKE A SYMPTOM
STOP IT, ISOLATE IT AND THEN
TO LOOK AT IT IN DETAIL.
Osgood:
CHARCOT DECLARES,
"THE CAMERA DOES NOT LIE."
IT WOULD BECOME AS CRUCIAL
TO HIS STUDY OF HYSTERIA
AS THE MICROSCOPE IS
FOR BIOLOGISTS.
AUGUSTINE WAS ONE
OF CHARCOT'S FAVORITE PATIENTS.
SHE WAS HIS SUPERMODEL.
AUGUSTINE WAS YOUNG,
SHE WAS PRETTY
SHE WAS VERY WELL DEVELOPED.
HE POINTS ALL OF THIS OUT
IN HIS BOOKS.
AND SHE RESPONDED WELL
TO THE CAMERA.
Osgood:
CHARCOT WILL TAKE SOME 10,000
PHOTOGRAPHS OF HIS PATIENTS...
SEARCHING FOR A PATTERN
IN THE PANOPLY OF SYMPTOMS.
CURIOUSLY, THESE SYMPTOMS
SEEM TO REFLECT
THE CULTURE OF THE TIME.
HE WAS PRODUCING PHOTOGRAPHS
OF BEAUTIFUL, SOMETIMES, WOMEN
IN VERY ODD, BUT ALSO IN SOME
WAYS VERY FAMILIAR POSITIONS.
IF YOU STUDY THE PHOTOGRAPHS
OF THE HYSTERICS
IN THE SALPETRIERE
YOU WILL SEE
THEY RESEMBLE VERY MUCH
THE WOMEN IN PAINTINGS
OF THE RENAISSANCE.
THIS IS NOT AN ACCIDENT.
CHARCOT WAS A GREAT ADMIRER
OF PAINTING.
HE SAW HIMSELF AS A MAN
WHO WAS CULTIVATED,
ARTISTIC, LEARNED
AND HE WANTED HIS OWN WORK
TO INTERSECT
WITH FRENCH CULTURE GENERALLY
AND IT DID.
Osgood:
INTELLECTUALS AND THE PUBLIC
ALIKE TAKE GREAT INTEREST
IN CHARCOT'S
SCIENTIFIC ENDEAVOR.
HE BECOMES A CELEBRITY HIMSELF
ON THE STREETS OF PARIS
AND BEYOND.
RENOWNED FOR
HIS THEATRICAL FLAIR
HE ATTRACTS A WIDE AUDIENCE
EVERY TUESDAY
WHEN HE OFFERS
A LECTURE DEMONSTRATION
FOR DOCTORS WHO COME
FROM AROUND THE WORLD
TO SEE THE PROCLAIMED
"PRINCE OF SCIENCE."
SOMETIMES PATIENTS
HE HAD NEVER SEEN BEFORE
AND HE WOULD DIAGNOSE THEM.
AND SOMETIMES PATIENTS CAME IN
HEHADTREATED BEFORE
AND THEY WOULD BE HYPNOTIZED
AND CHARCOT WOULD INSTRUCT THEM
TO HAVE HYSTERICAL SEIZURES.
AND HE WOULD EXPLAIN WHAT WAS
GOING ON TO THE AUDIENCE.
SO IT BECAME THE HOTTEST TICKET
IN PARIS.
EVERYBODY WENT.
EVERYBODY WHO WAS
IN THE MEDICAL WORLD HAD TO GO.
BUT NOVELISTS WENT,
JOURNALISTS WENT, PAINTERS WENT.
EVERYONE WHO WAS ANYONE
IN LATE-19th-CENTURY PARIS
HAD TO GO.
Osgood:
ONE MEMBER OF THE AUDIENCE
CAPTIVATED BY CHARCOT
IS A YOUNG DOCTOR FROM VIENNA
WHO IS JUST EMBARKING
ON HIS OWN CLINICAL CAREER--
SIGMUND FREUD.
FREUD HAS BEEN TRAINED
IN NEUROLOGY
ATORIES
FREUD HAS BEEN TRAINED
IN NEUROLOGYPEAN LABOR
STUDYING THE BRAINS OF EELS,
FISH AND EVENTUALLY HUMANS.
BUT IN TIME, FREUD TURNS
AWAY FROM HIS MICROSCOPE.
Man:
HE DID ALL
THE TRADITIONAL THINGS
THAT PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING
TO GO INTO BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE
WOULD DO AT THAT TIME
AND HE WAS TRYING TO APPLY
THE THINKING THAT HE WAS DOING
TO ISSUES OF
BEHAVIORAL ABNORMALITIES--
DISTURBANCES THAT HE SAW
IN PEOPLE THAT
HE WAS WORKING WITH--
AND HE WAS VERY FRUSTRATED
THAT ALTHOUGH
HE COULD STUDY THE BRAIN
AND TRY TO LOOK AT ITS ANATOMY,
HE JUST NY WAY
THAT THAT WORK COULD
BE DIRECTLY APPLICABLE
TO THE CLINICAL PROBLEMS
THAT HE WAS CONCERNED WITH.
Osgood:
WHILE STUDYING WITH CHARCOT
IN PARIS
FREUD BECOMES FASCINATED
BY THE PATIENTS AT SALPETRIERE.
BUT THE BRAIN-LESION THEORY
OF HIS FRENCH MENTOR
DOES NOT MAKE SENSE.
PATIENTS WITH PARALYZED HANDS
CAN STILL MOVE THEIR ARMS.
THOSE WITH PARALYZED FEET
CAN STILL MOVE THEIR LEGS--
MOVEMENTS THAT WOULD BE
COMPLETELY IMPOSSIBLE
IF THEIR PARALYSIS WERE TRULY
CAUSED BY A BRAIN DISORDER.
Harrington:
THE SYMPTOMS OF HYSTERIA
DIDN'T FOLLOW BIOLOGICAL LOGIC.
IT FOLLOWED A KIND
OF A LAYMAN'S SENSE
OF HOW PARALYSIS
PROBABLY SHOULD HAPPEN.
Osgood:
FREUD'S DOUBTS INCREASE
WHEN AUTOPSY AFTER AUTOPSY
OF HYSTERICAL PATIENTS
YIELD NOTHING.
THE HOPED-FOR BRAIN LESION
NEVER MATERIALIZES.
BUT PERHAPS WHAT IS
MOST TROUBLING TO FREUD
IS SOMETHING
MUCH CLOSER TO HOME.
MANY EUROPEANS--
FROM THE MAN ON THE STREET
TO THE MEDICAL ELITE--
SHARE CHARCOT'S BELIEF
THAT CERTAIN TYPES OF PEOPLE
ARE MORE PRONE TO DEGENERATE
INTO MADNESS...
PEOPLE WHO COME
FROM WEAKENED STOCK
BAD BLOOD.
JEWS, AS A GROUP,
ARE SINGLED OUT.
AND THE JEWISH COMMUNITY
IN VIENNA
OF WHICH FREUD IS A MEMBER,
IS NO EXCEPTION.
Micale:
ACCORDING TO
DEGENERATIONIST THEORY
JEWS WERE MORE PRONE TO NERVOUS
AND NEUROTIC BREAKDOWN.
THEY WERE INCLUDED
IN A CATEGORY OF CHARACTER TYPES
THAT WERE PARTICULARLY
SUSCEPTIBLE
TO NERVOUS DEGENERATION.
UNDERSTANDABLY, FREUD IS
NOT SYMPATHETIC TO THIS IDEA.
HE SENSES AN ANTI-SEMITIC
CONTENT IN IT
AND I'M ALMOST CERTAIN
THAT THIS IS A PERSONAL FACTOR
THAT ALLOWS HIM
Osgood:
WITH THIS, FREUD CONCLUDES
HIS COLLEAGUES HAVE FAILED
TO EXPLAIN MENTAL DISORDERS.
THEY HAVE FOCUSED
ONLY ON THE PHYSICAL BODY
IGNORING THE COMPLEXITY
OF THE MIND.
FINDING HYSTERIA'S TRUE CAUSE,
HE BELIEVES
REQUIRES A RADICALLY
NEW APPROACH
WHICH FREUD WILL UNDERTAKE IN
HIS PRIVATE PRACTICE IN VIENNA.
IN THE PROCESS, HE WILL SEEK
NOT ONLY TO EXPLAIN HYSTERIA
BUT ALSO PRESENT
THIS CENTURY'S FIRST
DISTINCTLY PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY
OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR.
HIS FIRST CLUE COMES FROM
FELLOW NEUROLOGIST JOSEF BREUER
AND BREUER'S PATIENT,
BERTHA PAPPENHEIM
REFERRED TO AS "ANNA O."
Micale:
PAPPENHEIM IS
A VERY YOUNG WOMAN;
HAD SEARCHED OUT JOSEF BREUER
AND PRESENTED TO BREUER
AN EXTRAORDINARY IDIOSYNCRATIC
SERIES OF SYMPTOMS.
SHE WAS HAVING
DIFFICULTY SLEEPING.
SHE WAS SUFFERING
FROM NIGHTMARES.
IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE
FOR HER TO DRINK WATER
AND IN THE MORE SEVERE STAGES
OF HER DISORDER
SHE HAD LOST THE ABILITY
TO SPEAK HER NATIVE GERMAN.
AND LATER TELLS
TO A YOUNG SIGMUND FREUD.
Osgood:
THROUGH HYPNOSIS,
BREUER COAXED ANNA O.
TO REMEMBER WHEN
HER SYMPTOMS FIRST APPEARED...
TO A TIME WHEN HER FATHER
BECAME GRAVELY ILL.
ONCE SHE REMEMBERED
THIS TRAUMATIC EPISODE
AND TALKED OPENLY ABOUT IT,
HER SYMPTOMS VANISHED.
THIS BECOMES KNOWN AS
THE "TALKING CURE."
FREUD NEVER ACTUALLY
MEETS ANNA O.
BUT WHAT IMPRESSES HIM MOST
IS THE PARTICULARITY
OF HER SYMPTOMS
AND THEIR LINK
TO A PERSONAL TRAUMA.
Harrington:
TO FREUD, THE SYMPTOMS
OF HYSTERIA REVEAL
NOT WHAT'S WRONG
WITH A PATIENT'S BRAIN
BUT, IN A SENSE, WHAT HAD GONE
WRONG IN THE PATIENT'S LIFE.
THEY BECOME SYMPTOMS
OF TRAUMATIC EVENTS
EMOTIONALLY INTOLERABLE EVENTS
THAT A PATIENT HAD REPRESSED
AND THEREFORE, THAT RATHER
THAN FINDING EXPRESSION
IN APPROPRIATEEMOTIONAL
AFF... UH, EXPRESSION
FOUND EXPRESSION
IN BODILY SYMPTOMS.
Osgood:
AFTER SEEING PATIENT
AFTER PATIENT
FREUD BELIEVES THAT SYMPTOMS
ARE INVARIABLY BORN
OUT OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA.
THEEANINGFUL
IN AND OF THEMSELVES
BUT ACT AS A ROAD MAP
TO A SUBMERGED INNER LIFE
THAT IS TROUBLED.
Roth:
FREUD SAYS THAT HYSTERICS SUFFER
MAINLY FROM REMINISCENCES;
THAT IS, WHAT CAUSES A SYMPTOM
IS SOMETHING
IN THE PAST OF THE PATIENT
THAT HE OR SHE CANNOT GET OVER,
CANNOT FACE, CANNOT THINK ABOUT
AND THAT IT TAKES
AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF ENERGY
TO STAY AWAY FROM
THAT PART OF THEIR PAST.
Osgood:
SO TOXIC IS THIS MEMORY,
IT IS BANISHED
TO A PART OF THE MIND WHICH
FREUD CALLS "THE UNCONSCIOUS."
WHERE DREAMS AND SLIPS
OF THE TONGUE TAKE SHAPE...
THE HOME OF FANTASIES
AND FEARS...
OF UNCENSORED THOUGHTS
AND SEXUAL DESIRES...
THE BIRTHPLACE, FREUD BELIEVES,
OF ALL EMOTIONAL TRAUMA.
FROM HIS IDEA OF THE UNCONSCIOUS
FREUD DEVELOPS PSYCHOANALYSIS,
A NEW THEORY OF THE MIND
AND A TECHNIQUE
TO GAIN ACCESS TO IT--
A THEORY THAT MANY
T.
Micale:
FREUD IS ATTACKED
IN HIS OWN TIME
ON A GREAT MANY
DIFFERENT GROUNDS.
CERTAINLY THE MOST IMMEDIATE
AND THE BEST KNOWN
OF THE GROUNDS
WAS THAT HIS IDEAS
WERE PORNOGRAPHIC.
BECAUSE HE DISCUSSES SEXUALITY
SO EXTENSIVELY
AND IN SUCH A COLD,
NEUTRAL, ANALYTIC TONE
THEY SEE THIS
AS MORALLY IMPERMISSIBLE.
Osgood:
FREUD IS ALSO ATTACKED
FOR OTHER REASONS.
THE UNCONSCIOUS CANNOT
BE SEEN OR TESTED.
YOU CANNOT STUDY IT UNDER
A MICROSCOPE, OR DISSECT FOR IT.
THERE IS NO MATERIAL PROOF
OF ITS EXISTENCE.
TO SOME, FREUD'S
PSYCHOANALYSIS SEEMS
TOO THEORETICAL, TOO
PHILOSOPHICAL, TOO UNSCIENTIFIC.
Roth:
HE WAS NOT A SUCCESSFUL
THEORETICIAN IN THE EARLY YEARS.
HIS WORK DID, HOWEVER, ATTRACT
THE INTEREST OF
A FAITHFUL BAND OF ADHERENTS
AND FREUD USED THEIR COMMITMENT
TO HIM AND TO PSYCHOANALYSIS
AS THE BASIS FOR DEVELOPING
A PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT
THAT RESEMBLES UNFORTUNATELY,
IN MY VIEW, IN MANY WAYS
A CHURCH IN ITS EARLY YEARS--
PEOPLE WHO HAVE TO BE COMMITTED
TO THE CARDINAL CONCEPTS
OF PSYCHOANALYSIS
IN ORDER TO BE TREATED
AS FAITHFUL ADHERENTS.
Harrington:
FREUD WAS ABLE TO CREATE
A KIND OF RELIGIOUS ZEAL
IN INTELLECTUALS
MANY OF WHOM WERE JEWISH
OR FELT, IN THE CONTEXT
OF VIENNESE SOCIETY
SOMEWHAT MARGINALIZED.
HERE THEY COULD BE AT THE CENTER
OF SOMETHING VERY EXCITING
THAT WAS POTENTIALLY
GOING TO TRANSFORM
THE WAY IN WHICH
WE THINK THE MIND WORKS.
Osgood:
BY 1914, FREUD'S FOLLOWING
IS STILL RELATIVELY SMALL
BUT THAT WILL ALL CHANGE SOON.
POLITICAL EVENTS WILL THRUST
FREUD'S PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES
ONTO A WORLD STAGE
PROVIDING A BRUTAL
LIVING LABORATORY
FOR THE EFFICACY
OF FREUD'S IDEAS.
WORLD WAR I.
GERMANY IS PITTED AGAINST
MOST OF EUROPE, RUSSIA
AND LATER, THE UNITED STATES.
Roth:
THE FIRST WORLD WAR WAS
EUROPE'S ENCOUNTER WITH MASS
DESTRUCTION THROUGH TECHNOLOGY.
YOU DIDN'T KILL SOMEONE
CLOSE UP.
YOU WERE OFTEN
JUST LYING IN A DITCH
AND SUDDENLY
SOMEONE NEXT TO YOU WOULD DIE
BECAUSE AN EXPLOSION WOULD SEND
SHRAPNEL AND KILL THAT PERSON.
OR YOU WOULD BE IN A DITCH
FOR DAYS, AND THEN SUDDENLY
YOU WERE TOLD, "GET UP
AND WALK ACROSS THAT FIELD."
Osgood:
THE WAR LASTS LONGER
THAN ANYONE HAD ANTICIPATED.
DAYS BECOME MONTHS,
AND MONTHS STRETCH IN
THE HUMAN TOLL IS ENORMOUS.
SOLDIERS WRITE HOME:
"THE SIGHTS WERE AWFUL--
"DEAD MEN ALL OVER THE PLACE,
SOME HALF-BURIED BY SHELLS.
"IT WAS SIMPLY A CASE
OF LOOKING DEATH IN THE FACE
AND WAITING TO BE HIT."
EARLY IN THE WAR
AN ENGLISH PSYCHOLOGIST
NAMED CHARLES MEYERS--
BASED AT THE FRONT--
REPORTS SEEING SOLDIERS
COME OUT OF THEIR TRENCHES
WITH MYSTERIOUS SYMPTOMS.
HE THINKS THE CAUSE MAY BE
A POISON GAS OR CHEMICALS--
ALL OF WHICH ARE TESTED FOR
TO NO AVAIL.
DOCTORS SEE SOLDIERS
WITH UNEXPLAINED TREMORS;
SOME WHO HAVE GONE
BLIND OR DEAF OVERNIGHT;
OTHERS MUTE, PARALYZED, CRYING.
MEYERS SPECULATES THAT THESE
BEHAVIORS ARE SOMEHOW RELATED
TO EXPLODING SHELLS ON THE FRONT
SO HE CALLS IT "SHELL SHOCK."
BUT THEN, SOLDIERS WHO
HAVE YET TO SEE COMBAT
APPEAR WITH SIMILAR SYMPTOMS.
Roth:
SHELL SHOCK, IN MANY WAYS
RESEMBLED
THE SYMPTOMS OF HYSTERIA.
THAT WAS VERY EMBARRASSING.
HYSTERIA WAS SOMETHING
THAT HAPPENED TO WOMEN.
EVEN THOUGH THE 19th CENTURY
SAW THEORIES THAT SHOWED
THAT MEN COULD
BE HYSTERICS, TOO
THE CRUMBLING OF THE PSYCHE
WAS THOUGHT TO BE SOMETHING
THAT WOMEN WERE PRONE TO.
THIS WAS SEXIST,
EVEN MISOGYNISTIC SCIENCE.
DOCTORS TRIED TO FIND
ANOTHER NAME FOR IT
SO AS TO SPARE THEIR SOLDIERS
THE SHAME OF BEING
CALLED HYSTERICS.
Showalter:
THEY ABSOLUTELY COULDN'T BELIEVE
THAT MEN COULD BE HYSTERICAL
AND WHEN THEY BEGAN
TO SEE THE SYMPTOMS IN MEN
ALL THE DOCTORS SAID,
"THIS LOOKS LIKE HYSTERIA."
BUT AT SOME LEVEL
THEY WOULD NOT ALLOW
THEMSELVES TO BELIEVE IT.
Osgood:
"WAR NEUROSIS"
"BURIED-ALIVE NEUROSIS"
"SOLDIER'S HEART"--
ALL NAMES TO DESCRIBE
MALE HYSTERIA.
SOME 80,000 SOLDIERS
WOULD SUCCUMB
DURING THE COURSE OF THE WAR.
MILITARY DOCTORS LOOK
LONG AND HARD
FOR A PHYSICAL EXPLANATION
FOR THE SYMPTOMS;
DENCE OF DAMAGE
FOR A PHYSICAL EXPLANATION
TO THE NERVOUS SYSTEM;E EVI
FOR EVIDENCE OF
TAINTED HEREDITY.
THEY WERE SO PERSUADED THAT
THERE HAD TO BE AN ORGANIC CAUSE
AND IN SOME WAYS, SO PREJUDICED
AGAINST A PSYCHOLOGICAL CAUSE
THAT AS THEY ELIMINATED
AND ELIMINATED AND ELIMINATED
POSSIBLE SOURCES
THEY JUST CONTINUED TO LOOK.
THE ONLY EXPLANATION LEFT
IS COWARDICE.
TO MANY OFFICERS,
THESE SOLDIERS ARE MALINGERERS
WHO SHOULD BE TRIED,
COURT-MARTIALED AND EXECUTED.
AND IN FACT, SOME ARE.
BUT AMONG DOCTORS,
THERE ARE A PIONEERING FEW
FAMILIAR WITH FREUD'S THEORIES
WHO BELIEVE THAT SHELL SHOCK
IS PSYCHOLOGICAL.
FOR THEM, THE WAR OFFERS
AN UNUSUAL OPPORTUNITY.
Showalter:
FREUD HAD WORKED WITH A VERY
SMALL NUMBER OF PATIENTS
AND WITH WOMEN PATIENTS WHO CAME
FROM QUITE A LIMITED
SEGMENT OF VIENNESE SOCIETY--
UPPER-MIDDLE-CLASS WOMEN FROM
JEWISH FAMILIES BASICALLY
WHO WERE LEADING LIVES
OF BOREDOM AND LEISURE.
AND SUDDENLY
HERE YOU HAVE THE WAR--
80,000 SHELL-SHOCK CASES
IN THE EUROPEAN ARMIES.
SO THEY PROVIDED
AN EXTRAORDINARY WEALTH
OF EXPERIMENTAL MATERIAL,
SO TO SPEAK
AND DOCTORS, AT THE SAME TIME
THAT THEY WERE APPALLED
WERE FASCINATED.
THEY RECOGNIZED THE OPPORTUNITY
THEY HAD BEFORE THEM
TO STUDY PRECISELY
THE KINDS OF CONFLICTS
THAT FREUD HAD WRITTEN ABOUT
IN THIS VERY, VERY LARGE
SAMPLE OF THE POPULATION.
Harrington:
WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT WAS HAPPENING
PSYCHOLOGICALLY
TO THESE YOUNG MEN
IN THE TRENCHES
THAT WERE CAUSING THEM
TO DEVELOP THESE SYMPTOMS.
EVERYTHING IN YOUR BODY
IS SAYING
"GET OUT OF THERE;
SAVE YOURSELF"
AND EVERYTHING
IN YOUR TRAINING IS SAYING
"YOU'VE GOT TO STAY
IN THE TRENCHES
AND DEFEND YOUR COUNTRY," AND
THE CONFLICT IS SO UNBEARABLE
THAT AS THE PSYCHOANALYSTS
WOULD ULTIMATELY SAY
THE ORGANISM TAKES
A FLIGHT INTO ILLNESS.
Showalter:
SHELL SHOCK IS THE BODY LANGUAGE
OF POWERLESSNESS
AND POWERLESSNESS CAN COME IN
A LOT OF DIFFERENT SITUATIONS.
YOU CAN HAVE POWER IN THE WORLD
WHERE YOU ARE POWERLESS,
FOR A VARIETY OF REASONS
TO SPEAK YOUR REAL FEELINGS
THE BODY WILL CONVERT
THOSE FEELINGS INTO SYMPTOMS.
THESE SOLDIERS,
WHO WERE BRAVE, WHO WERE FIT
WHO WERE PATRIOTIC,
FOUND THEMSELVES DEALING WITH
FEAR, ANXIETY, GRIEF,
LONELINESS, DISORIENTATION
AND ALL THESE KINDS OF FEELINGS
WHICH WERE NEW TO THEM
AND WHICH WERE NOT
PART OF THE SOCIETY'S DEFINITION
OF WHAT IT MEANT TO BE A MAN.
THEY COULDN'T ARTICULATE
THOSE FEELINGS.
Osgood:
DOCTORS TRY ANY METHOD--
FROM CRUDE FORMS OF ELECTRIC
SHOCK TO TALKING THERAPY--
TO RESTORE THE SOLDIER
TO FIGHTING SHAPE
AND BACK TO THE FRONT.
FOR THOUSANDS
OF SOLDIERS LIKE THESE
IT IS THE TALKING CURE THAT
WORKS WHEN NOTHING ELSE DOES.
SIMPLY TALKING CAN SAVE THEM.
MANY SOLDIERS FROZEN IN FEAR
CAN NOW BE HEALED.
SOLDIERS IMMOBILIZED
BY MEMORIES CAN NOW MOVE ON.
THE LABORATORY OF WAR
DEMONSTRATES THAT MANY
OF FREUD'S IDEAS
ARE MORE THAN ABSTRACT THEORIES;
THEY CAN OFFER
A PRACTICAL BASIS FOR TREATMENT.
ABOUT THE HIDDEN SOURCES
OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
FOR DECADES TO COME.
I THINK IT SHOWED UP
TO PEOPLE ON A MASSIVE SCALE
THAT EMOTIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
FACTORS WERE EXTREMELY IMPORTANT
IN DETERMINING OUR MENTAL LIVES.
IT'S AS AN EXPERIENCE OF THE WAR
THAT PSYCHOLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY
NOW CEASE BEING
SIMPLY MEDICAL SPECIALTIES
APPLIED TO A VERY
TINY NUMBER OF PEOPLE
BUT A WAY TO UNDERSTAND,
IN GENERAL
OURSELVES, OUR MINDS
AND OUR WORLD.
WHEN WORLD WAR I
COMES TO A CLOSE
A BATTLE OF
A DIFFERENT SORT BEGINS
ONLY THIS TIME
THE WEAPONS ARE WORDS
AND THE SOLDIERS ARE SCIENTISTS.
THIS NEW BATTLE WILL RAGE
BETWEEN TWO DIAMETRICALLY
OPPOSED VIEWS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR.
ON ONE SIDE ARE THE SCIENTISTS
WHO SEE OUR PERSONALITIES
AS UNCHANGING, FIXED AT BIRTH,
BIOLOGICALLY DETERMINED.
AND ON THE OTHER SIDE ARE
THOSE WHO BELIEVE WE CAN CHANGE
THAT WE ARE INFLUENCED
BY OUR EXPERIENCES
AND WHAT WE LEARN ALONG THE WAY.
WHEN THE DEBATE HEATS UP
IN THE UNITED STATES
LIFE IS CHANGING RAPIDLY
AND DRAMATICALLY.
IT'S AN UNSETTLING TIME
FOR MOST PEOPLE.
WE YEARN FOR STABILITY
AND NORMALCY AND CERTAINTY.
WHAT SCIENTISTS HAVE TO SAY
ABOUT HUMAN BEHAVIOR--
WHETHER IT'S FIXED AT BIRTH
AND PREDICTABLE
OR SHAPED BY THE ENVIRONMENT
AND CHANGEABLE--
WILL HAVE A PROFOUND EFFECT
ON HOW PEOPLE VIEW THE FUTURE
HOW THEY SEE EACH OTHER, AND
EVEN HOW THEY LIVE THEIR LIVES.
Osgood:
IN 1918, THE WAR TO END ALL WARS
IS FINALLY OVER.
AMERICAN SOLDIERS RETURN TO A
COUNTRY EAGER TO TAKE ITS PLACE
AS A LEADER
IN A RAPIDLY CHANGING WORLD.
BUT AMERICA'S OPTIMISTIC HOPES
FOR THE FUTURE ARE SOON UNDERCUT
BY SOME UNEXPECTED
AND DISTURBING NEWS.
THE ARMY PUBLISHES
THE RESULTS OF TESTS
IT CONDUCTED DURING WARTIME
ASSESSING THE MENTAL CAPACITY
OF ITS RECRUITS.
USION:
ASSESSING THE MENTAL CAPACITY
OF ITS RECRUITS.NG CONCL
NEARLY HALF OF ALL AMERICAN
SOLDIERS ARE FEEBLEMINDED.
ARMY PSYCHOLOGISTS
HAVE FIRED THE FIRST SHOT
ENTIFIC WAR THAT
ARMY PSYCHOLOGISTS
WILL LE.IRED THE FIRST SHOT SCI
WHEN THE ARMY TESTS RESULTS WERE
PUBLISHED, AND IT WAS STATED
THAT A GOODLY PORTION OF
INDUCTEES INTO THE U.S. ARMY
HAD A MENTAL AGE OF UNDER 12--
ERGO, MORON BY POPULAR
DEFINITION OF PSYCHOLOGISTS--
THERE WAS A SENSE OF SHOCK.
HOW COULD IT BE
THAT SO MANY AMERICAN BOYS
HAD SUCH LOW INTELLIGENCE?
THEY LED PEOPLE TO BELIEVE
THAT WE HAD A MAJOR PROBLEM
NAMELY, WE HAD TOO MANY MORONS;
THE COUNTRY WAS FILLED
WITH MORONS.
THE THEORY THAT
THE ARMY TESTS HAVE PROVEN
THAT THE COUNTRY IS REALLY
A LOT DUMBER THAN PEOPLE THOUGHT
IS GOING TO FEED INTO
A LOT OF FEARS
Osgood:
THE FEARS MU
THE FEAR THAT
AMERICA'S GENE POOL
IS BEING WEAKENED BY AN UNENDING
INFLUX OF IMMIGRANTS;
THE HAT AMERICANS WILL
LACK THE MENTAL FACULTIES
TO PERFORM THE COMPLEX TASKS
OF MODERN LIFE.
WHEN THE ARMY COMMISSIONED
THE TESTS DURING THE WAR
THE GENERALS FACED
A STAGGERING LOGISTICAL TASK.
DELUGED WITH SOME
TWO MILLION RECRUITS
THEY TRIED TO MATCH
EACH MAN TO THE JOB
CHOOSING POTENTIAL OFFICERS AND
WEEDING OUT POTENTIAL MISFITS.
IN DESPERATION, THE ARMY TURNED
TO A GROUP OF PSYCHOLOGISTS
TO GET THE JOB DONE: A
STANDARDIZED INTELLIGENCE TEST.
HENRY GODDARD, FATHER OF THE
FIRST AMERICAN INTELLIGENCE TEST
IS PART OF A NEW WAVE
OF PSYCHOLOGISTS
EAGER TO BE OF SERVICE
TO THEIR COUNTRY.
Zenderland:
THEY HAD ONE CLEAR, PRACTICAL
GOAL FOR THEIR SCIENCE--
TO SORT THE ENTIRE ARMY,
QUICKLY, IN AN HOUR.
THEY HAD TO FIND A TEST
THAT COULD BE DONE FAST
AND THAT COULD
IMMEDIATELY DISTINGUISH
DIFFERENT LEVELS
OF MENTAL SKILL.
Osgood:
THEY SPRING INTO ACTION.
THEY TEST GENERAL KNOWLEDGE
WITH QUESTIONS LIKE:
"WHAT IS CRISCO?"
"WHAT IS THE PRODUCT
ADVERTISED BY VELVET JOE?"
OR "WHAT IS A DIBBLE?"
Zenderland:
THE ARMY TESTS REQUIRED
AN IMMENSE AMOUNT
OF CULTURAL INFORMATION.
ONE HAD TO KNOW AMERICAN SPORTS
ONE HAD TO KNOW
AMERICAN ADVERTISING
ONE HAD TO KNOW THAT VELVET JOE
WAS A CHARACTER
WHO ADVERTISED TOBACCO.
Osgood:
IN ADDITION, THEY ALSO ASK
QUESTIONS OF PRACTICAL JUDGMENT:
"IS BLACK THE SAME AS WHITE?"
AND "WHY IS BEEF
BETTER FOOD THAN CABBAGE?"
THE INHERENT FALLACY, CERTAINLY
OF THE TESTS OF THOSE DAYS
WAS THE FACT THEY WERE FILLED
WITH THE CULTURE OF
A PARTICULAR CLASS AND LOCATION
AND WERE TREATED AS THOUGH
THEY WERE UNIVERSAL AND FAIR.
AND PEOPLE WHO WERE
NOT FROM THOSE CLASSES OR GROUPS
DID NOT DO WELL.
NATIVE, INBORN INTELLIGENCE,
NOT ACQUIRED KNOWLEDGE...
AND THIS INTELLIGENCE SHOULD BE
AS MEASURABLE AS A BAR OF STEEL.
Man:
IT WAS BELIEVED THAT THERE WAS
AN ENTITY CALLED INTELLIGENCE
AND THAT TESTS WERE MEASURING IT
IN THE SAME WAY THAT THERE'S
AN ENTITY CALLED POTATOES--
WHEN YOU PUT THEM ON A SCALE
THERE'S A SCALE
THAT'S MEASURING THEM.
Narrator:
THE SCALE FOR INTELLIGENCE
IS DEVELOPED BY HENRY GODDARD
AT THE TRAINING SCHOOL FOR
FEEBLEMINDED BOYS AND GIRLS
IN VINELAND, NEW JERSEY.
THROUGH HIS OBSERVATIONS,
HE COMES TO BELIEVE
THAT INTELLIGENCE-- AND ITS
OPPOSITE, FEEBLEMINDEDNESS--
IS INHERITED.
BUT AS A SCIENTIST,
GODDARD WANTS PROOF.
HE CONFESSES TO HIS FRIEND,
CHARLES DAVENPORT:
"WHEN IT COMES TO
THE GENETICS OF INTELLIGENCE
I HAVE MUCH MORE ZEAL
THAN KNOWLEDGE."
CHARLES DAVENPORT IS A PIONEER
FIELD
CHARLES DOF GENETICS.A PIONEERG
HE, TOO, BELIKE INTELLIGENC
E
CAN BE PASSED DOWN
FROM ONE GENERATION TO THE NEXT.
IF, AS THE EXPERIMENTS
OF GREGOR MENDEL HAVE SHOWN
E GENE FOR WRINKLED
IF, AS THE EXPERIMENTS
PEAS AND ANOTHER FOR SMOOTH ON
ONE GENE FOR BLUE EYES
AND ANOTHER FOR BROWN
THEN PERHAPS THERE ARE
ALSO GENES FOR OTHER TRAITS
LIKE INTELLIGENCE.
A RESPECTED BIOLOGIST FRF CHI
CAGO
THE HEREDITY TRAITS OF ANIMALS--
CHICKENS, CANARIES AND RABBITS.
THROUGH HIS RESEARCH,
DAVENPORT BECOMES CONVINCED
THAT MENDELIAN GENETICS
WILL EXPLAIN
N
IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS
BUT ALSO IN HUMAN BEINGS.
Man:
THEY TRIED TO FIND
BIOLOGICAL BASES
OF THINGS
THAT THEY CALLED NOMADISM--
THE TENDENCY OF PEOPLE
TO MOVE FROM PLACE TO PLACE.
AND AT LEAST ONE GENETICIST
FOUND A GENETIC BASIS
FOR WHAT HE CALLED
THALASSOPHILIA, LOVE OF THE SEA
THAT WAS EXPRESSED
IN NAVAL OFFICERS
AND WHICH HE CONTENDED
MUST BE A SEX-LINKED TRAIT--
THAT IS, TO MALES--
BECAUSE ONLY MALES
BECAME OFFICERS IN THE NAVY.
Narrator:
AND DAVENPORT BELIEVES THAT
OTHER TRAITS ARE LINKED, TOO.
HE BELIEVES
THAT LOW INTELLIGENCE
CAUSES POVERTY, CRIMINALITY
AND PROSTITUTION
AND IF INTELLIGENCE
IS FIXED AT BIRTH
THEN THESE BEHAVIORS MUST BE
GENETIC IN ORIGIN AS WELL.
THE TRAITS WERE BELIEVED
TO BE UNCHANGEABLE.
WE HAD, AS A MATTER OF FACT,
THE PHRASE:
"THE LEOPARD CANNOT
CHANGE HIS SPOTS."
THEREFORE,
PEOPLE CANNOT CHANGE
WHAT WAS GIVEN TO THEM
BY NATURE.
THERE WAS A BELIEF
WE WERE PRODUCTS OF NATURE
PREDESTINED TO BE
WHAT WE WERE BORN
AND THAT ENVIRONMENT
HAD NO EFFECT ON IT.
Osgood:
DAVENPORT'S IDEAS CATCH FIRE
AMONG THOSE
LOOKING FOR SCIENTIFIC WAYS
TO IMPROVE SOCIETY.
HE RECRUITS GRADUATES
OF VASSAR AND HARVARD
EAGER TO JOIN HIM ON THE
VARESEARCH.
HE PERSUADES THE CARNEGIE
INSTITUTION OF WASHINGTON
TO FUND A NEW RESEARCH STATION
IN COLD SPRING HARBOR, NEW YORK.
ALL FOR THE PROMOTION
OF EUGENICS
A MOVEMENT TO IMPROVE
THE QUALITY OF THE HUMAN RACE
BY SELECTIVE BREEDING.
BUT NOT EVERYONE BELIEVES
THAT BIOLOGY IS DESTINY.
FOR MANY SCIENTISTS, IT'S YOUR
EXPERIENCES IN LIFE THAT COUNT--
YOUR UPBRINGING, YOUR EDUCATION,
UR ENVIRONMENT.
CHIEF AMONG THESE SCIENTISTS
IS PSYCHOLOGIST JOHN WATSON
WHO OFFERS A THEORY THAT IS
THE MIRROR OPPOSITE OF EUGENICS.
THIS WAS THE HEYDAY OF
HEREDITARIANS AND GENETICISTS
WHO SAID THAT HUMAN BEINGS
WERE CONSTRAINED BY THEIR
GENETIC INHERITANCE.
AND WATSON WAS SAYING
THAT THIS IS BALONEY;
THAT HUMAN BEINGS WERE SHAPED
SOLELY BY THEIR ENVIRONMENT.
Osgood:
OVER THE YEARS, WATSON STUDIES
THE BEHAVIOR OF BABIES--
HUNDREDS OF THEM.
TO WATSON, WE ARRIVE
IN THE WORLD A BLANK SLATE--
TABULA RASA.
NEARLY EVERYTHING IS LEARNED
EVEN THINGS WE THINK
ARE INSTINCTUAL, LIKE FEAR.
TO PROVE THAT ENVIRONMENT
IS MORE POWERFUL THA
WATSON DESIGNS AN EXPERIMENT
FOR AN INFANT KNOWN AS
LITTLE ALBERT.
HE'S SO CONFIDENT,
HE FILMS IT FOR POSTERITY.
AT FIRST,
ALBERT SHOWS LITTLE FEAR
EVEN WHEN WATSON PLACES
A BURNING NEWSPAPER
IN FRONT OF HIM.
ALBERT IS ALSO UNAFRAID
WHEN HE ENCOUNTERS A WHITE RAT
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN HIS LIFE.
BUT THEN WATSON
SHOWS ALBERT THE RAT
ACCOMPANIED
BY A LOUD CLANGING NOISE--
ONE OF THE FEW THINGS THAT
UPSETS LITTLE ALBERT.
(cries)
AND HE DOES IT AGAIN...
N.
(loud clanging)
EVENTUALLY, ALBERT LEARNS
TO FEAR NOT JUST THE RAT
BUT ALL FURRY THINGS,
EVEN WITHOUT THE LOUD NOISE.
IN WATSON'S MIND, THE LITTLE
ALBERT EXPERIMENT IS A SUCCESS
BECAUSE IT PROVES THAT FEARS
ARE LEARNED, NOT INHERITED.
WATSON CALLS
HIS THEORY "BEHAVIORISM"
AND BEGINS TO POPULARIZE IT.
HE URGES PARENTS
TO TAKE ACTIVE CONTROL
OF THEIR CHILDREN'S UPBRINGING
BY SHAPING THEIR ENVIRONMENT...
TO THINK OF THE HOME
AS A SCIENTIFIC LABORATORY.
ATSON'S
TO THINK OF THE HOME
AS INTEREST IN CHILDHOODRY.T W
IS PURELY PROFESSIONAL.
Maher:
HE DIDN'T LIKE CHILDREN MUCH.
HE REFERRED TO THEM,
IN ONE OF HIS MANY STATEMENTS
AS ALWAYS SQUALLING
AND SHOUTING AND DIRTY
AND WANTING TO BE FED
AND SORT OF A NUISANCE.
IT WAS CLEAR HE DIDN'T
PARTICULARLY LIKE THEM
IN HIS OWN ENVIRONMENT
BUT HE FELT
THAT THE GOOD OF SOCIETY
REQUIRED SHAPING INDIVIDUALS
RIGHT FROM DAY ONE
YOU HAD TO START
WITH THE BABIES.
Narrator:
EBULLIENT AND SELF-PROMOTING
WATSON GATHERS A WIDE
AND APPRECIATIVE AUDIENCE
WHICH HOLDS IN HIGH ESTEEM
ANY SCIENTIFIC THINKING
ON THE SUBJECT OF CHILD REARING.
SCIENCE WAS
INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT
IN THE POPULAR MIND-SET.
IF SCIENCE SAID SOMETHING,
IF SCIENTISTS TESTED
IF SCIENTISTS EXPERIMENTED,
WELL, THEN, IT MUST BE SO.
Osgood:
BUT THE APPEAL OF BEHAVIORISM
RUNS DEEPER.
ITS EGALITARIAN PHILOSOPHY
AND OUTLOOK
SEEMS TO REFLECT
THE VERY SPIRIT OF DEMOCRACY.
Maher:
WATSON WAS THE VOICE
OF THE AMERICAN DREAM
THE AMERICAN DREAM WAS
THAT THIS IS THE LAND
OF OPPORTUNITY.
YOU CAN BECOME
WHAT YOU WOULD LIKE TO BE
EVEN IF YOU'RE NOT THERE YET.
AND AT LEAST IF YOU DON'T DO IT
IN YOUME
THIS IS  IN WHICH
YOUR CHILDREN CAN DO IT.
Osgood:
THE AMERICAN DREAM
OF OPPORTUNITY
DRAWS MILLIONS OF IMMIGRANTS.
THEY COME BY THE SHIPLOAD
TO FILL THE JOBS
OF A RAPIDLY
EXPANDING ECONOMY...
TO SEEK A BETTER LIFE.
BUT THE ARRIVAL
OF NEW IMMIGRANTS
INCREASES ALL KINDS OF FEARS.
SOME ARE ECONOMIC--
THAT THE IORKER
WILL LOWER THE WAGES
OF AMERICAN WORKERS
OR TAKE THEIR JOBS ALTOGETHER
ALL THE WHILE CROWDING
THEIR CITIES AND THEIR SCHOOLS.
AND THERE ARE ALSO
BIOLOGICAL FEARS.
CHARLES DAVENPORT AND OTHERS
IN THE EUGENICS MOVEMENT WORRY
THAT THE NEW IMMIGRANTS
FROM SOUTHERN AND EASTERN EUROPE
ARE BRINGING DEFECTIVE GENES
WITH THEM.
THEY HAVE NO FAITH THAT AMERICA
WILL TRANSFORM THE IMMIGRANTS.
IF ANYTHING, THEY FEAR
THE IMMIGRANTS
WILL TRANSFORM AMERICA.
FOR THE EUGENICISTS
THE IMMIGRANTS' DREAM
IS THEIR NIGHTMARE.
Kraut:
IF THESE NEWCOMERS
WHO CAME OFF THE SHIPS--
WHO SEEMED SO SHORT,
SO MISSHAPEN
COMPARED TO RUGGED
AMERICAN INDIVIDUALS--
INTERMARRIED AND BRED IN
THIS COUNTRY, THERE WAS A FEAR
THAT THEY WOULD ACTUALLY WEAKEN
"THE RACE," AS IT WAS CALLED.
INDEED, SOME SPOKE
OF "RACE SUICIDE"
THAT IMMIGRATION COULD LEAD TO
AMERICANS ACTUALLY ANNIHILATING
THEIR OWN RUGGED, ROBUST,
PIONEERING BREED.
Woman:
AND THE IDEA WAS THAT
MANY OF THEM WERE DEFECTIVE
AND THAT THE AMERICAN POPULATION
WAS QUICKLY FILLING UP
WITH DEFECTIVES.
THE NOTION WAS THAT AMERICA HAD
BECOME THE ASYLUM OF THE WORLD.
Osgood:
THERE IS A GROUNDSWELL
OF NATIONAL SUPPORT
TO SET STRICT
IMMIGRATION QUOTAS.
FROM LABOR UNIONS
TO THE KU KLUX KLAN
THEY JOIN TOGETHER
TO PRESSURE PRESIDENT COOLIDGE
TO PROTECT THE NATION
BY SIGNING THE 1924
IMMIGRATION RESTRICTION ACT.
IT'S A LAW THAT, IN THE WORDS
OF ONE CONGRESSMAN
"IS A NECESSITY FOR KEEPING PURE
THE BLOOD OF AMERICA."
FOR THE EUGENICS MOVEMENT
THE IMMIGRATION ACT
IS A GREAT VICTORY.
A NATIONAL CAMPAIGN IS UNDER WAY
TO SPREAD THE EUGENIC VISION
TO LOCAL COMMUNITIES.
STATE FAIRS ARE A FAVORITE PLACE
TO EDUCATE THE PUBLIC.
THAN AT A LIVESTOCK COMPETITION?
IF YOU COULD CONTROL BREEDING
YOU COULD CONTROL THE EVOLUTION
AND THE FATE OF A SOCIETY.
YOU COULD BREED
FOR INTELLIGENCE.
YOU COULD BREED FOR JUSTICE.
YOU COULD BREED
FOR GOOD MORAL SENSE.
FOR PHYSICAL APPEARANCE.
Zenderland:
IT HAD A WIDE APPEAL TO PEOPLE
ACROSS A BROAD
POLITICAL SPECTRUM.
THAT MAN MIGHT CONTROL
THE PROCESS OF BIRTH
THAT MAN MIGHT ELIMINATE
BIRTH DEFECTS...
THAT MAN MIGHT ACTUALLY
BREED A BETTER HUMAN BEING.
Osgood:
ALONG WITH THE USUAL
COMPETITIONS--
BEST LIVESTOCK...
BEST CROPS...
AND BEST HOMEMADE GOODS...
THERE'S ALSO THE BEST
HUMAN STOCK COMPETITION.
BABIES WERE EXAMINED
AND WEIGHED AND MEASURED
TO DETERMINE
WHO WAS THE MOST ROBUST.
Osgood:
THERE ARE EVEN "FITTER FAMILIES"
COMPETITIONS.
ANY HEALTHY AMERICAN FAMILY
CAN ENTER.
ALL YOU NEED IS
TO TAKE A MEDICAL EXAM
AN INTELLIGENCE TEST AND SUPPLY
A COMPLETE EUGENIC HISTORY.
BUT INVARIABLY
THE WINNERS ARE WHITE,
OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN STOCK.
THIS IS THE PINNACLE
OF THE EUGENICS MOVEMENT
IN THE UNITED STATES.
THERE ARE NEW IMMIGRATION LAWS.
THERE ARE NEW MARRIAGE LAWS
FORBIDDING MIXED-RACE MARRIAGES.
THERE ARE EVEN
NEW STERILIZATION LAWS
PREVENTING CRIMINALS, EPILEPTICS
AND THE INSANE FROM REPRODUCING.
LAWS ALL DESIGNED
TO PROTECT THE GENE POOL...
ALL WIDELY ACCLAIMED
BY EUGENICISTS
BIOLOGICAL WISDOM.NSIDER
THE EUGENICS MOVEMENT
BEGINS TO LOSE ITS CREDIBILITY
AT LEAST AS SCIENCE, WHEN
A NEW GENERATION OF SCIENTISTS
BEGIN TO STUDY GENETICS
WHEN THEY BEGIN TO DISCOVER,
FOR INSTANCE
THAT EVEN UNDERSTANDING
AN ORGANISM
AS SIMPLE AS A FRUIT FLY
IS FAR MORE COMPLEX A PROCESS
THAN WE EVER DREAMED POSSIBLE.
Osgood:
IN LABORATORIES, LIKE THIS ONE
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
SCIENTISTS ARE STUDYING
THE INHERITANCE PATTERNS
OF FRUIT FLIES.
BECAUSE FRUIT FLIES
BREED QUICKLY
IT MAKES THEM IDEAL SUBJECTS
FOR EXPERIMENTS
TO SEE HOW THEY CHANGE.
BY THE LATE 1920s,
RESEARCH MAKES CLEAR
THAT GENETICS
WILL NOT BE EXPLAINED
AS SIMPLY AS
"ONE GENE, ONE TRAIT."
THE WORK SHOWS THAT MANY TRAITS
ARE NOT THE PRODUCT
OF SINGLE GENES
BUT ARE POLYGENIC,
THE PRODUCT OF SEVERAL GENES.
SOMETHING AS SIMPLE
AS EYE COLOR, FOR EXAMPLE
CAN BE AFFECTED
BY AS MANY AS SEVEN
DIFFERENT GENETIC VARIABLES.
AND IF A FRUIT FLY
IS THIS COMPLEX
WHAT, SCIENTISTS WONDER, DOES
THAT IMPLY FOR HUMAN GENETICS?
BUT IN THE PUBLIC'S MIND,
THE SCIENCE OF GENETICS
THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF EUGENICS
TO EXPLAIN HUMAN BEHAVIOR.
ON A SHEER PRACTICAL LEVEL,
BEHAVIORISM, FOR EXAMPLE
HAS BECOME FAR MORE PERVASIVE
THAN HARDLY ANYONE REALIZES.
STILL LEADING THE PACK
IS JOHN WATSON HIMSELF
WHO HAS LEFT ACADEMIA
FOR THE FAR MORE LUCRATIVE FIELD
OF ADVERTISING.
IT'S THE PERFECT HOME
FOR HIS BELIEF
THAT BEHAVIOR ISN'T FIXED AT ALL
BUT IS SHAPED BY OUTSIDE FORCES.
Buckley:
WATSON BELIEVED
THAT THE CONSUMER
IS TO THE MANUFACTURER
WHAT THE GG IS TO
THE EXPERIMENTAL PHYSIOLOGIST.
WHAT WATSON BELIEVED IS
THAT HE HAD THE TECHNIQUES
AT HIS DISPOSAL
TO SHAPE CONSUMER BEHAVIOR.
WATSON WENT INTO ADVERTISING
ARMED WITH THE INFORMATION
AND THE VIEWS HE HAD SHOWN
IN THE CASE OF LITTLE ALBERT
NAMELY, THAT IF YOU PAIR
TWO SEPARATE THINGS TOGETHER
YOU CAN GET THE RESPONSES
NORMALLY MADE TO ONE
ATTACHED TO THE OTHER--
RESPONSE TO THE LOUD NOISE
BECAME ATTACHED
TO THE SIGHT
OF THE FURRY ANIMAL.
IN ADVERTISING, HE WAS
THE PERSON WHO DID THINGS
LIKE GET CIGARETTES SHOWN
IN THE CONTEXT OF HANDSOME MEN
BEAUTIFUL WOMEN, BIG CARS,
MANSIONS.
AND WHAT THAT SAID, SO TO SPEAK,
WAS, YOU SMOKE THE CIGARETTE
THAT'S THE ASSOCIATION
THAT YOU WILL HAVE.
Osgood:
JOHN WATSON
AND THE FIELD OF ADVERTISING
IS THE PERFECT MARRIAGE
OF THEORY AND PRACTICE.
IT'S BEHAVIORISM AT WORK--
CONDITIONING THE MINDS
OF CONSUMERS
THAT THEY TRULY NEED
THE PRODUCTS
THAT AMERICAN BUSINESS
WANTS TO SELL.
THE CONDITIONING
THAT WORKED SO WELL IN THE LAB
WORKS EQUALLY WELL IN THE FIELD.
Maher:
THE BEHAVIORISTS' ASSERTION
THAT WITH APPROPRIATE CONTROL
ONE COULD SHAPE AN INDIVIDUAL
TO DO ANYTHING, TO BE ANYTHING
ALSO, OF COURSE, MEANT
THAT A PERSON COULD BE SHAPED
TO EVIL PURPOSES
AS WELL AS BENEVOLENT ONES.
(trumpet blaring,
drums beating)
Osgood:
ONE PERSON WHO TRULY UNDERSTANDS
THE MANIPULATION
OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
AND ITS TERRIFYING POTENTIAL IS
A RISING POLITICIAN IN GERMANY.
ADOLF HITLER AND HIS NAZI PARTY
COME TO POWER IN THE EARLY '30s
BY USING EVERY TECHNIQUE
PROPAGANDA HAS TO OFFER
TO INFLUENCE THE GERMAN PEOPLE.
IN FILMS LIKE THIS ONE
HE PROMOTES THE CREDO
OF THE NAZI PARTY:
BEAUTY, STRENGTH, HEALTH--
THE EUGENIC IDEAL.
IT IS IN HITLER'S CAMPAIGN
FOR POWER
THAT THE CENTURY'S TWO OPPOSING
VIEWS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR--
WHETHER BEHAVIOR IS FIXED
OR MALLEABLE-- COME TOGETHER
WITH NO APPARENT CONTRADICTION
TO THE GERMAN PEOPLE.
THE IRONY IS
THAT HITLER HIMSELF
BELIEVING IN RACIAL SUPERIORITY
USED SOCIAL MANIPULATION
CONSTANTLY TO CONVINCE PEOPLE
TO DO WHAT HE WANTED IN THE
SERVICE OF RACIAL SUPERIORITY.
SO HIS PROPAGANDA...
HE MOLDED PEOPLE
IN THE DIRECTION THAT HE SAW
THEM, THAT HE WANTED THEM TO GO
HE MOLDED THEM THROUGH
DEMONSTRATIONS, THROUGH RALLIES
THROUGH PROPAGANDISTIC MESSAGES,
THROUGH THE FILM AND ART.
HE MOLDED PEOPLE...
THAT AT THE SAME TIME
HE WAS TELLING THEM:
"YOU ARE BIOLOGICALLY
DETERMINED.
YOU ARE WHAT YOU ARE,
AND YOU'RE NOT GOING TO CHANGE."
Osgood:
PROPAGANDA IS JUST THE BEGINNING
OF THE NAZI AGENDA.
FIRST, THEY OFFER "FITTER"
FAMILIES FINANCIAL REWARDS
FOR HAVING LOTS
OF BETTER BABIES.
NEXT, THEY START TO RID GERMANY
OF PEOPLE
THEY FEEL WILL POISON THE RACE.
BY MID-1EXTREME STERILIZATION L
AWS
PARTLY MODELED ON
AMERICAN EUGENIC POLICIES.
EUGENICISTS THOUGHT
THAT STERILIZATION
WOULD STOP THE PROLIFERATION
OF UNDESIRABLE ASPECTS
OF THE POPULATION
BY PREVENTING THE BIRTH--
IN BLUNT TERMS--
OF FOLKS THEY FIND
AS UNDESIRABLE
WOULD BE THE NEATEST SOLUTION.
AND THEY WOULD SAY THAT
YOU DO THE SOCIETY A FAVOR
BY NOT REPRODUCING.
Osgood:
BY THE EARLY 1940s
HITLER'S PLAN TO PURIFY
GERMANIC CULTURE ESCALATES.
NO LONGER IS IT ONLY
A MATTER OF STERILIZING
"TAINTED" INDIVIDUALS.
NOW THOSE GROUPS CONSIDERED
A MENACE TO THE RACE--
LIKE JEWS, HOMOSEXUALS
AND GYPSIES--
MUST BE SEGREGATED, THEN SENT
TO DEATH CAMPS TO BE KILLED.
BY 1945, MILLIONS HAVE DIED
IN THE NAME OF EUGENICS.
BUT IN THE END,
THE STORY OF EUGENICS
WOULD PROVE THE OPPOSITE
OF ITS CORE BELIEF:
THAT HUMAN BEHAVIOR
IS BIOLOGICALLY DETERMINED
FIXED AND UNCHANGING.
INSTEAD IT SHOWS
THAT PEOPLE CAN BE SO MALLEABLE
THEY CAN LEARN TO DO
JUST ABOUT ANYTHING
NO MATTER HOW OUS.
Harrington:
THE EXCESSES OF
HITLER'S GERMANY--
THE FACT THAT MASS MURDER,
THAT GENOCIDE HAD BEEN COMMITTED
IN THE NAME OF RACIAL PURITY
IN THE NAME OF A EUGENICALLY
INSPIRED RACIAL CLEANSING--
WAS VERY FRIGHTENING TO PEOPLE
EVEN TO PEOPLE THAT PREVIOUSLY
MAY HAVE BEEN ATTRACTED
TO A KIND OF IDEALISM
THAT WAS ALSO PART
OF THE IDEA OF EUGENICS.
AND SO YOU SEE IN THE YEARS
AFTER WORLD WAR II
A REAL PULLING BACK FROM
EXPLANATIONS OF MENTAL ILLNESS
OF INTELLIGENCE,
OF ALL SORTS OF BEHAVIORS
ROOTED IN GENETIC UNDERSTANDINGS
AND A TURN INSTEAD TOWARDS
ENVIRONMENTAL UNDERSTANDINGS.
IN THE 1950s
MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
SCANNED THE DAILY PAPERS
FOR THE LATEST ADVICE
FROM "DEAR ABBY" OR ANN LANDERS.
THESE TWIN SISTERS
FROM SIOUX CITY, IOWA
ARE THE MOST POPULAR ADVICE
COLUMNISTS IN THE COUNTRY.
AMERICANS LOVE ADVICE.
THEY'RE HELL-BENT
ON SELF-IMPROVEMENT
OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THEIR PROSPECTS
AND GUIDED BY
A NEAR-RELIGIOUS BELIEF
THAT THEY CAN ALWAYS CHANGE
FOR THE BETTER.
THE OPPOSITE VIEW--
THAT BEHAVIOR IS FIXED AT BIRTH
AND CAN'T BE CHANGED--
IS STILL ASSOCIATED
WITH NAZI GERMANY
WHERE EUGENICS WAS USED
TO JUSTIFY GENOCIDE.
SO AMERICANS EMBRACE SCIENTISTS
WHO BELIEVE THE OPPOSITE--
THAT WHEN IT COMES TO IRONMENT T
HAT COUNTS
AND VIRTUALLY ANYTHING
IS POSSIBLE.
THESE ARE OPTIMISTIC TIMES
IN 1945.
THE SOLDIERS WHO FOUGHT AGAINST
TOTALITARIANISM OVERSEAS
ARE RETURNING HOME TO THE MOST
POWERFUL NATION IN THE WORLD.
RETURNING TO LIVES
INTERRUPTED...
TO GIRLFRIENDS...
TO FAMILIES LEFT BEHIND.
WITH THE WAR FINALLY OVER
AND VICTORY WON
ANYTHING, AND EVERYTHING,
SEEMS POSSIBLE.
Maher:
PEOPLE THOUGHT THAT AFTER
THE STUNNING ACHIEVEMENTS
OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
IN THE VICTORY OF WORLD WAR II
THAT THERE WAS, IN PRINCIPLE,
NO LIMIT TO WHAT IT COULD DO
NOW IN THE INTEREST
OF THE GOOD LIFE AFTER THE WAR.
THE TECHNOLOGY THAT HAD ALLOWED
US TO WIN THE WAR
TO DEFEAT HITLER,
TO DEFEAT THE NAZIS
THIS TECHNOLOGY COULD NOW
BE PUT INTO THE SERVICE
OF LIBERATING INDIVIDUALS
OF HELPING THEM
DEVELOP THEMSELVES.
SO IT WAS A TRANSLATION, I THINK
OF TECHNOLOGY FROM
AN EMPHASIS ON WEAPONRY
TO A TECHNOLOGY ON AN EMPHASIS
ON THE HUMAN SPIRIT
AND THE DEVELOPMENT
OF HUMAN NATURE.
AND WE COULD TRANSLATE
THAT EXPERTISE
FROM ONE DOMAIN TO THE OTHER.
THIS SETUP MAKES
ANY DAY WASH DAY FOR ME.
AND I CAN DO MY DRYING
IN ANY KIND OF WEATHER.
Osgood:
BY THE 1950s
MANY AMERICANS DEVELOP
A NEARLY INSATIABLE APPETITE
FOR ALL THE NEW THINGS
THAT CAN BE MANUFACTURED,
BOUGHT, SOLD AND CONSUMED.
Singer:
WE SEE THE IDEA THAT WE COULD
ENGINEER THE HOUSEHOLD.
WE COULD ENGINEER THE FAMILY.
WE COULD ENGINEER ALLOCIETY
.
Osgood:
WHILE SOME SCIENTISTS ENGINEER
SHINY NEW CONSUMER GOODS
FOR AN EAGER PUBLIC
HARVARD PSYCHOLOGIST
B.F. SKINNER SEEKS NOTHING LESS
THAN THE ENGINEERING
OF HUMAN NATURE.
IN EXPERIMENTS WITH SUBJECTS
AS SIMPLE AS PIGEONS
SKINNER DECLARES THAT WITH
THE RIGHT SOCIAL ENGINEERING
WE CAN CREATE A NEW BREED
OF HUMAN BEING.
SKINNER IS FIRMLY IN
THE BEHAVIORIST TRADITION
PIONEERED BY JOHN WATSON
IN THE 1920s.
LIKE WATSON, SKINNER CONTENDS
THAT WITH THE RIGHT TOOLS
WE CAN PREDICT
AND CONTROL BEHAVIOR.
SKINNER REALLY INHERITED
THE MANTLE FROM WATSON
OF BEHAVIORISM IN THIS COUNTRY
BUT IT'S KIND OF INTERESTING
TO THINK ABOUT
HOW THERE'S A SUBTLE DIFFERENCE
IN THE WAY THEY WENT ABOUT IT.
WATSON, AS WE KNOW
ENDED UP BECOMING
AN ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE
ENDED UP EMBRACING THE AMERICAN
VALUE SYSTEM AS IT EXISTED.
SKINNER WAS DIFFERENT.
SKINNER WAS A VISIONARY.
SKINNER FELT THAT
THROUGH BEHAVIORISM
HE COULD INFLUENCE THE WORLD
TOWARDS A GREATER HUMANITY--
NOT MEET HUMANITY WHERE IT WAS,
BUT TAKE HUMANITY TO A NEW PLACE
THROUGH THE PRINCIPLES
OF BEHAVIORISM.
Osgood:
PICKING UP WHERE
WATSON LEFT OFF
SKINNER WANTS TO DO
THE RIGOROUS SCIENCE
TO PROVE THAT ENVIRONMENT
IS EVERYTHING.
CHANGE THE ENVIRONMENT,
HE ARGUES
AND YOU CAN CHANGE
THE INDIVIDUAL...
OR, IN SKINNER'S CASE,
THE PIGEON.
Maher:
SKINNER HIMSELF
WAS A BORN GADGETEER.
HE HAD IN HIS OWN EARLY YEARS...
AS A BOY, FOR EXAMPLE,
HE DEV WAYS
-
AS A BOY, FOR EXAMPLE,
I THINK IT WAS CRANBERRIES--E-
FROM UNRIPE CRANBERRIES.
HE INVENTED A CANNON
THAT WOULD SHOOT THINGS
OVER HIS NEIGHBOR'S FENCE.
THIS WAS
THE KIND OF MAN HE WAS.
HE WAS DEVELOPING NEW WAYS
TO DO EVERYDAY THINGS
IN WAYS THAT WERE MORE
COMFORTABLE, MORE EFFICIENT.
Osgood:
DURING WORLD WAR II
SKINNER HAD DEVELOPED
A PIGEON GUIDANCE DEVICE
FOR THE U.S. MILITARY.
WHILE THE RUSSIANS
HAD DOGS CARRYING BOMBS
AND THE SWEDES HAD SEALS
TO BLOW UP MINES
SKINNER HAD A PLAN OF HIS OWN:
TEACHING PIGEONS TO GUIDE
MISSILES TO AN ENEMY TARGET.
AT THE TIME, HOWEVER
THE AD
NO MISSILES TO GUIDE.
BUT SKINNER'S PIGEON RESEARCH
DID NOT GO TO WASTE.
HE DEVELOPS A SYSTEM
CALLED "OPERANT CONDITIONING"
TO PROVE THAT A BEHAVIOR
WILL BE REPEATED BY A SUBJECT
WHEN REWARDED.
REPETITION LEADS
TO REINFORCEMENT...
REINFORCEMENT
TO CHANGES IN BEHAVIOR.
Announcer:
THIS HUNGRY PIGEON
IS MOVING ABOUT
MORE OR LESS AT RANDOM.
SOMETIMES IT TURNS ITS HEAD
TO THE LEFT.
WHEN IT DOES, WE REINFORCE
THAT MOVEMENT
BY GIVING THE PIGEON ACCESS
TO A DISH OF GRAIN.
Osgood:
SKINNER THEN WAITS FOR IT
TO TURN FURTHER.
AGAIN, MORE FOOD.
ULTIMATELY THE PIGEON WILL TURN
IN A COMPLETE CIRCLE
HAVING LEARNED THAT ONLY WHEN
HE TURNS WILL HE BE REWARDED.
Singer:
WHAT SKINNER WAS ABLE TO DO
IN VERY CAREFULLY CONTROLLED
STUDIES WITH ANIMAL MODELS
WAS TO DEMONSTRATE
THAT WHOLE CHAINS OF BEHAVIORS
COULD BE BUILT STEP-BY-STEP
SO THAT LITERALLY YOU COULD
TEACH A PIGEON
TO DO COMPLICATED BEHAVIORS
THAT NO ONE WOULD
HAVE PREDICTED POSSIBLE.
Osgood:
AND SKINNER BELIEVES
THAT IF IT WORKS FOR PIGEONS,
WHY NOT PEOPLE?
IN SKINNER'S MIND,
BEHAVIOR IS BEHAVIOR
UP AND DOWN
THE EVOLUTIONARY SCALE
AND IT IS ALL LEARNED.
ONE OF THE GREAT SUCCESSES
IS IN EDUCATION.
PEOPLE ARE TAUGHT
TO DO MORE COMPLICATED TASKS
THAN ANYONE
HAD THOUGHT POSSIBLE
BY BREAKING DOWN BEHAVIOR
INTO SMALL STEPS
THE ESSENCE
OF SKINNER'S WORK WAS
THAT WE COULD MANIPULATE
THE ENVIRONMENT
IN WAYS THAT WOULD
PERMIT US TO PRODUCE
ANY KIND OF BEHAVIOR
THAT WE WISHED
AND WE COULD DEVELOP INDIVIDUALS
IN WAYS
THAT MADE EVERY POSSIBLE FUTURE
OPEN TO THEM.
Osgood:
THE IDEA THAT ANYTHING
IS POSSIBLE
HAS ENORMOUS APPEAL
IN THE '50s--
A TIME WHEN THE COUNTRY
IS CHANGING
AT A MIND-BOGGLING PACE.
IT'S THE BABY-BOOM ERA.
MOTHERS WHO WORKED
DURING THE WAR
ARE STAYING AT HOME
TO RAISE KIDS.
WITH ECONOMIC GROWTH
AND UNPRECEDENTED MOBILITY
YOUNG COUPLES ARE MOVING
AROUND THE COUNTRY
LIVING FAR FROM THEIR PARENTS
AND EXTENDED FAMILIES.
MOTHERS WANTING CHILD-REARING
ADVICE IN THIS BRAVE NEW WORLD
MAY NOT BE ABLE TO TURN
TO THEIR OWN MOTHERS.
AND HIS POPULAR BOOK.
DR. BENJAMIN SPOCK
OFFERS ADVICE
TO MILLIONS
OF WORRIED YOUNG PARENTS
ABOUT HOW TO RAISE THEIR KIDS
IN THE PROPER ENVIRONMENT.
HE COVERS EVERYTHING
FROM DIAPERS TO DISCIPLINE
BORROWING IDEAS MORE FROM FREUD
THAN FROM SKINNER.
HIS PARENTING MANUAL
SELLS MORE COPIES
THAN ANY BOOK IN HISTORY
SAVE ONE-- THE BIBLE.
Woman:
DR. SPOCK APPEALED TO THE NOTION
THAT PARENTS AND EXPERTS
WERE KIND OF IN THE
CHILD-NURTURE BUSINESS TOGETHER
THAT THEY WERE COOPERATING
TO PRODUCE HEALTHY CHILDREN,
DEMOCRATIC PERSONALITIES
AND THAT CHILD-REARING MANUALS
LIKEBABY AND CHILD CARE
COULD BE A USEFUL AID TO THOSE
KIND OF HOME-FRONT SCIENTISTS.
Osgood:
HOME-FRONT SCIENTISTS
HUNGRY FOR EXPERT ADVICE.
AND POPULAR TELEVISION
SATISFIES THEM
BY BRINGING THE LATEST
IN LAB SCIENCE
RIGHT INTO THEIR LIVING ROOMS.
Announcer:
Conquest--the search
for new knowledge
about our universe,
our world and ourselves.
This monkey is an orphan
separated from his mother
since the day of his birth.
Literally his life
hangs by a thread--
a soft cheesecloth pad
that is his only companion,
his only comfort.
Once a day, the pad
is removed for cleaning.
Osgood:
THIS IS THE LABORATORY
OF PSYCHOLOGIST HARRY HARLOW.
Announcer:
...is troubled, distressed.
Osgood:
HE IS STUDYING MONKEYS TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND HUMAN RELATIONSHIPS.
Announcer:
He may die for want of love.
Osgood:
HARLOW BELIEVES HE CAN USE
SCIENCE TO STUDY LOVE.
WITH A SERIES
OF PIONEERING EXPERIMENTS
HE EXPLORES TERRITORY WHERE
FEW SCIENTISTS HAVE VENTURED.
Herman:
HARLOW SAID
THAT THERE WAS SUCH A THING AS
A SCIENCE OF LOVE, FOR EXAMPLE--
THAT LOVE, THE KIND OF INTIMACY
THAT CHARACTERIZED RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN MOTHERS AND INFANTS--
ALTHOUGH IN HIS CASE
HE STUDIED MONKEYS--
THAT YOU LITERALLY COULD
MOVE LOVE INTO A LABORATORY
PUT IT UNDER A MICROSCOPE.
Osgood:
HARLOW IS STUDYING LOVE
BECAUSE HE BELIEVES IT MAKES
AN INDELIBLE IMPACT
ON A YOUNG LIFE.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
A MOTHER AND HER CHILD--
WHAT HARLOW CALLS OUR
EARLIEST SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT--
COULD HOLD THE KEY TO EXPLAINING
BEHAVIOR THROUGHOUT LIFE.
HARLOW DESIGNS A SET
OF INGENIOUS EXPERIMENTS:
HE RAISES A BABY MONKEY
ALLOWING IT TO CHOOSE
BETWEEN TWO SURROGATE MOTHERS:
AND A CLOTH MOTHER
THAT DOESN'T--
A CLOTH MOTHER
THAT HARLOW THINKS
MIGHT PROVIDE SOMETHING ELSE:
COMFORT AND LOVE.
Announcer:
Here's Baby 106
weaned on a wire mother.
He's going
to the wire mother.
Osgood:
BUT THIS INFANT QUICKLY RUNS
TO THE CLOTH MOTHER
WHERE HE WILL STAY FOR
THE NEXT 18 HOURS, CUDDLING...
IN HARLOW'S MIND, CHOOSING
NURTURING OVER SUSTENANCE.
IN ANOTHER EXPERIMENT, HARLOW
CREATES A FEARFUL SITUATION.
WHOM DOES THE INFANT
TURN TO NOW?
Announcer:
Let's find out what his
reactions to his mother are
when we frighten him.
He's scared, all right
and he does what any child
will do in a similar situation:
he was runningtohis mother
to touch her
to drive away his fear.
(screeching)
Osgood:
TO HARLOW, THERE IS SOMETHING
ABOUT THE EXPERIENCE OF COMFORT
AND LOVE-- EVEN MORE THAN FOOD--
THAT SEEMS CRUCIAL
TO ALL THESE MONKEYS.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN THE INFANT IS RAISED ALONE
WITHOUT ANY MOTHER AT ALL,
WIRE OR CLOTH?
IN THIS SITUATION,
THE ORPHAN MONKEY STAYS ALONE.
HE WON'T EVEN GO TO
THE CLOTH MOTHER WHEN FRIGHTENED
BUT RETREATS INTO HIS OWN WORLD.
HARLOW BELIEVES HE HAS SHOWN
HOW WANT OF LOVE
CAN DAMAGE AN INFANT FOR LIFE
AND HE WORRIES THE SAME IS TRUE
FOR PEOPLE.
IN HARRY HARLOW'S EXPERIMENT
WAS THAT EARLY EXPERIENCE
AND THE ENVIRONMENT WERE CRUCIAL
TO THE HEALTHY DEVELOPMENT
OF THE INFANT CHILD
AND THAT IN A SENSE,
IF YOU MESSED UP
IF THE RIGHT KIND OF
MATERNAL PRESENCE WAS NOT THERE
DURING THE CRITICAL YEARS,
THEN THAT INFANT MIGHT GROW UP
TO BE AN ADULT INCAPABLE OF
FORMING HEALTHY RELATIONSHIPS
WITH OTHER KINDS OF PEOPLE.
Osgood:
WHILE HARLOW FEELS THAT
A BAD ENVIRONMENT CAN DAMAGE YOU
THERE ARE OTHERS WHO BELIEVE
THAT A THERAPEUTIC ENVIRONMENT
COULD PROVIDE THE CURE.
CHIEF AMONG THEM
ARE PSYCHOANALYSTS.
BY THE 1950s, PSYCHOANALYSIS
HAS TAKEN AMERICA BY STORM
EVEN THOUGH FREUD HIMSELF
HAD DIED OVER A DECADE EARLIER.
Woman:
THERE'S A FUNDAMENTAL OPTIMISM
IN AMERICAN SOCIETY
THAT SAYS THAT IT'S POSSIBLE
TO FIX ALMOST ANY PROBLEM.
AND THE ATTITUDE
OF PSYCHOANALYSIS
THAT ULTIMATELY EVERY DIFFICULTY
COULD BE UNDERSTOOD
SEEN AS MEANINGFUL AND
POTENTIALLY, AT LEAST, CHANGED
WAS SOMETHING THAT WAS
VERY APPEALING TO AMERICANS.
Osgood:
FREUD ORIGINALLY DESIGNED
PSYCHOANALYSIS
TO HELP NEUROTIC INDIVIDUALS--
ESSENTIALLY NORMAL PEOPLE
DISABLED BY INNER CONFLICTS.
BUT HIS AMERICAN DISCIPLES
HERWISE.
ONE OF THE QUESTIONS
OF THE 1950s
WAS HOW POWERFUL WOULD
PSYCHOANALYSIS BE
AS AN INTERVENTION,
AS A THERAPY?
WAS IT ONLY GOING TO BE
A THERAPY FOR THE WORRIED-WELL
FOR THE MILDLY NEUROTIC,
FOR THE ANXIOUS?
OR COULD IT REALLY PACK
A SUFFICIENT THERAPEUTIC PUNCH
TO HELP THE MOST BRUTALLY
MENTALLY ILL OF OUR SOCIETY
THE SCHIZOPHRENICS?
Osgood:
ONE OF THE PSYCHOANALYSTS
WHO BELIEVES IT CAN
IS FRIEDA FROMM-REICHMANN.
TRAINED FIRST IN GERMANY
AS A NEUROLOGIST
SHE BELIEVES DEEPLY
THAT INSIDE EVERY PATIENT
NO MATTER
HOW SERIOUSLY DISTURBED
IF THE TREATMENT IS RIGHT.
Hornstein:
SHE DEVELOPED THIS ATTITUDE
PARTLY HAVING WORKED
WITH BRAIN-INJURED PATIENTS
IN WORLD WAR I
WHERE EVEN THOSE PATIENTS
WHO HAD BEEN HIT
BY SHELLS AND GASSED
WERE PEOPLE WHO COULD RECOVER
TO A CERTAIN EXTENT.
AND HER WHOLE APPROACH TO THEM
WAS BASED ON THEIR POTENTIAL
FOR RECOVERY
NOT FOR WHAT WAS DAMAGED.
SHE APPLIED
THIS SAME ORIENTATION
AND ALWAYS SEARCHED
FOR THE PART OF THE PATIENT
THAT WAS STILL INTACT.
Osgood:
WHEN FROMM-REICHMANN EMIGRATES
TO THE UNITED STATES
BUILT AS A RESORT IN THE 1890s
ON THE OUTSKIRTS
OF WASHINGTON, D.C.
IT IS LATER CONVERTED
INTO A MENTAL HOSPITAL.
BY THE 1950s, CHESTNUT LODGE
IS ONE OF A HANDFUL
OF PRIVATE PSYCHLS
IN THE COUNTRY
WHICH OFFERS PSYCHOTHERAPY
AS ITS PRIMARY TREATMENT.
ONLY THE WELL-HEELED
CAN AFFORD TO COME HERE
AND THE WAITING LIST IS LONG.
HERE PSYCHOTHERAPY
AIS USED TO TREAT PSYCHOTICS. W
THAT THE ENVIRONMENTAL CAMP
WILL FACE
ITS GREATEST CHALLENGE.
Man:
CHESTNUT LODGE
WAS A STRANGE PLACE
ALMOST A MYTHICAL ONE
BECAUSE WE HAD
FAIRLY GOOD EVIDENCE
THAT THEY REALLY COULD MAKE
A THERAPEUTIC IMPACT
THAT WAS SIGNIFICANT
ON SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS
SIMPLY BY PSYCHOTHERAPY ALONE.
Osgood:
SCHIZOPHRENIA--
AN ILLNESS MARKED BY A LOSS
OF CONTACT WITH REALITY
BY HALLUCINATIONS, VOICES,
PARANOIA.
IT IS NOT WELL UNDERSTOOD
IN THE 1950s
WHEN A YOUNG GIRL FROM BROOKLYN
ARRIVES, SEEKING HELP.
JOANNE GREENBERG WAITED
THREE YEARS
SHE FINALLY ENTERS TWO DAYS
AFTER HER 16th BIRTHDAY.
SHE WOULD LATER WRITE
ABOUT HER ILLNESS AND TREATMENT
IN A BEST-SELLING BOOK,I NEVER
PROMISED YOU A ROSE GARDEN.
Greenberg:
I HAD NO IDEA OF WHAT
WAS GOING ON ON THE OUTSIDE
BUT I WAS TRYING
WITH EVERYTHING I HAD
AND I HAD BEEN
SINCE THE AGE OF SIX
TO TRY AND MAKE IT RIGHT,
TO TRY AND FIX IT.
I THINK THE WORST FEAR SOMEHOW
IS NOT TO BE ALL RIGHT
AND IT'S ONLY LATER
WHEN YOU FINALLY SAY
A) YOU ARE NEVER
GOING TO BE ALL RIGHT
IT IS NEVER GOING TO BE
ALL RIGHT
THAT YOU SAY, "WELL, OKAY,
LET IT, LET IT ALL GO."
"TELL THEM ABOUT THE BLOOD
COMING OUT OF THE FAUCETS."
I'D SEE PEOPLE WALKING ALONG
WHO WERE JUST MASSES OF MAGGOTS.
ALL RIGHT, YOU KNOW,
TELL THEM ABOUT IT.
WELL, I DID.
Osgood:
FROMM-REICHMANN MEETS
WITH JOANNE DAILY.
SHE TREATS HER WITH A VARIATION
OF THE SO-CALLED "TALKING CURE."
SITTING WITH HER PATIENTS--
LISTENING, TALKING--
EVEN WHILE THEY WERE
HALLUCINATING
WITHDRAWN, RECALCITRANT.
Man:
IT WAS A VERY SIMPLE IDEA--
TALK TO PATIENTS.
LET THEM TALK TO YOU.
TAKE THEM SERIOUSLY,
TREAT THEM AS HUMAN BEINGS.
PEOPLE WERE NOT JUST STRUGGLING
WITH PSYCHOSIS, WITH INSANITY.
THEY ALSO HAD NONPSYCHOTIC
ASPECTS TO THEIR MINDS
TO THEIR PERSON
AND THAT IF YOU COULD
HOLD ONTO THAT ASPECT
YOU COULD MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
Greenberg:
I HAD THERAPY
FOUR TIMES A WEEK.
BUT FOR THOSE YEARS
THAT I WAS IN THE HOSPITAL
THAT'S ALL I DID,
AND THAT TOOK EVERYTHING I HAD.
IT'S A VERY, VERY
DIFFICULT PROCESS.
MY ALLY HAD A FIRST-RATE MIND
AND WOULD NOT ALLOW ME
TO GET AWAY WITH MUCH.
SHE WAS TRYING TO ELICIT FROM ME
THINGS ABOUT MY LIFE
THAT COUNTED IN THE WAY
I SAW REALITY.
IT DOESN'T SOUND LIKE MUCH--
YOU TELL THE DOCTOR THINGS
AND THE DOCTOR HEARS
AND LISTENS
BUT I THINK IT REROUTES
YOUR BRAIN.
I THINK IT REROUTES
YOUR SENSE OF REALITY.
I THINK IT REWIRES YOU...
(laughs) SOMEHOW
UH... BECAUSE
WHEN THAT CHANGE HAPPENS...
IT'S A PROFOUND CHANGE.
Osgood:
JOANNE GREENBERG
LEAVES CHESTNUT LODGE
THREE YEARS AFTER SHE ARRIVED.
TWICE SHE RETURNS
FOR SHORT STAYS.
BUT ULTIMATELY
JOANNE GOES TO COLLEGE, MARRIES,
RAISES HER CHILDREN AND WRITES.
FOR JOANNE GREENBERG
FROMM-REICHMANN'S TALKING CURE
WAS ENOUGH.
BUT THIS TURNS OUT
TO BE UNUSUAL.
MOST PSYCHOTICS TREATED SOLELY
BY TALKING THERAPY
EVENTUALLY RELAPSE.
SO, EVEN UNDER
THE BEST OF CIRCUMSTANCES
WITH THE MOST COMMITTED
CLINICIANS
HO BELIEVE
WITH THE MOST COMMITTED
THE ENVIRONMENT CAN CURERS W
ONLY ACHIEVE OCCASIONAL SUCCESS.
AND IN THE UNITED STATES
IN THE 1950s
MOST OF THE SEVERELY
MENTALLY ILL
ARE NOT IN THE BEST HOSPITALS
UNDER THE BEST CIRCUMSTANCES.
THEY END UP IN STATE
MENTAL INSTITUTIONS.
HERE THERE IS A DIFFERENT
THEORETICAL ORIENTATION
ONE ROOTED IN BIOLOGY,
BUT AGAIN WITH LITTLE SUCCESS.
McGlashan:
THEY BELIEVED THAT
SEVERE MENTAL ILLNESS
WERE BASICALLY ORGANIC
NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS;
ESSENTIALLY IRREVERSIBLE,
LIKE MOST NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS
AND THAT THE VICTIMS,
THE PATIENTS
TO BE TAKEN CARE OF
AND OFTEN TAKEN CARE OF
FOR THE REST OF THEIR LIVES.
Lehmann:
THE PATIENTS WERE
DOING THEIR OWN THING.
HER
Lehmann:
THE PATIENTS WERE
DSITTING ON THE FLOOR.E EIT
STARING AT THE CEILING,
LISTENING TO VOICES.
I REMEMBER IN ONE BIG WARD WHERE
ABOUT 150 PEOPLE WERE SITTING
THE ATTENDANT EVERY 20 MINUTES
OR HALF AN HOUR
HE WOULD CLAP HIS HANDS
AND THEN EVERYBODY WOULD GET UP
AROUND THE WARD,
HEWHICH WAS QUITE BIG,S
AND THEN ONCE OR TWICELD GET UP
AND THEN HE CLAPPED AGAIN
AND THEY WOULD SIT DOWN.
THAT'S TO GIVE THEM
SOME EXERCISE.
NOT OUTSIDE BECAUSE
ALL THE WARDS WERE LOCKED
COMPLETELY LOCKED.
Osgood:
DOCTORS OFFER WHAT THEY CAN:
THEY DOUCHE, SPRAY,
SHOCK, OPERATE.
PATIENTS SIT
IN CARBON DIOXIDE CHAMBERS;
IN REFRIGERATED ROOMS;
THEIR TEETH ARE PULLED;
THEIR BLOOD IS LET;
THEIR BRAINS ARE SLICED.
BUT THE PROBLEM OF TREATING
THE DESPERATELY ILL
DOES NOT ABATE.
NEITHER SIDE
IN THE ONGOING BATTLE--
AT CHESTNUT LODGE OR
IN THE STATE MENTAL HOSPITAL--
SEEMS TO HAVE THE ANSWER.
THE GREAT CHALLENGE
IN THE HISTORY OF PSYCHIATRY
IS THAT A GIVEN TREATMENT HAS
ALWAYS WORKED FOR SOME PATIENTS
AND NOT FOR OTHERS.
IS THAT A GIVEN TREATMENT HAS
ALWAYS WORKED FOR SOME PATIENTS
EVERY TREATMENT
THAT YOU CAN DISCUSS
HOWEVER CRAZY IT NOW SOUNDS
TO US OR HOWEVER THOUGHTFUL
WORKED FOR SOME PEOPLE
AND NOT FOR OTHERS.
DOCTORS WOULD TRY WHATEVER
SEEMED MOST SUCCESSFUL TO THEM.
I REMEMBER A STUDENT GROUP
WENT THROUGH THE HOSPITAL
ON A SIGHT-SEEING TOUR--
MEDICAL STUDENTS--
AND THEY SAW PATIENTS
GESTICULATING TO THE CEILING
AND TALKING TO THEIR VOICES,
AND THEY TURNED TO ME, ONE
AND ASKED, "WILL THERE EVER
BE KIND OF A PILL
"THAT WE'D GIVE THESE PEOPLE
THAT WOULD STOP THIS
TERRIBLE TORTURE THEY HAVE?"
AND I PATRONIZINGLY SMILED,
AND I SAID
"WELL, IT WON'T BE A PILL, BUT
SOMEHOW WE'LL PROBABLY LEARN
HOW TO DO BETTER
THAN WE DO NOW."
BUT, YOU KNOW,
IT SEEMED TO BE RIDICULOUS.
Osgood:
BUT IN 1952, IN FRANCE
THE SEEMINGLY RIDICULOUS
IS PURSUED ANYWAY.
HERE IN PARIS,
AT A GENERAL-PRACTICE HOSPITAL
AN ACCIDENTAL DISCOVERY
LEADS TO RESEARCH
ON A RADICALLY NEW TREATMENT
A TREATMENT THAT MIGHT NOT ONLY
GIVE NEW HOPE TO PATIENTS
BUT ALSO REVOLUTIONIZE
THE WAY PSYCHIATRY LOOKS
AT MENTAL ILLNESS.
IT BEGINS WITH A SURGEON
NAMED HENRI LABORIT
IN SEARCH OF A MEDICATION
THAT WILL CALM HIS PATIENTS
BEFORE SURGERY.
HE ADAPTS AN EXISTING COMPOUND
BY ADDING AN ANTIHISTAMINE.
HE FINDS THAT THE NEW DRUG,
CALLED CHLORPROMAZINE
OR LARGACTIL,
DOES QUIET HIS PATIENTS.
AND SO HE PROPOSED TO SOME
PSYCHIATRIST FRIENDS OF HIS
THAT HEY, MAYBE THIS DRUG
MIGHT BE USEFUL
FOR YOUR TERRIBLY CRAZY PATIENTS
BECAUSE IT SEEMS TO HAVE
THIS FAVORABLE EFFECT.
AND IT WAS ON THAT BASIS
THAT THIS DRUG WAS FIRST TRIED
WITH PEOPLE WITH.
Osgood:
THE FIRST TEST IS TRIED HERE
AS IN THE REST OF EUROPE
SCHIZOPHRENIA IS CONSIDERED
A NEUROLOGICAL DISORDER--
ONE THAT NO AMOUNT
OF TALKING CAN CURE.
PSYCHIATRISTS JEAN DELAY
AND PIERRE DENIKER
HEAD UP THE FIRST TRIAL.
PIERRE PICHOT IS
PART OF THEIR TEAM.
Pichot:
IN PSYCHIATRY, WE DIDN'T KNOW
ABOUT THE MECHANISM--
BIOLOGICAL MECHANISM
OF THE MENTAL DISORDERS.
SO, UH, EVERYTHING WAS TRIED
JUST BY, AS YOU SAY,
SERENDIPITY.
MAYBE IF SOMETHING
HAS A SEDATIVE EFFECT
IT COULD SEDATE
AND MAYBE DO SOMETHING ELSE.
Osgood:
DELAY AND DENIKER REALIZE
QUITE RAPIDLY
THAT THEY ARE ONTO
SOMETHING MOMENTOUS.
THEY REPORT A TRANSFORMATION
OF THEIR SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS
AND THE SUDDEN DISAPPEARANCE OF
THEIR HALLUCINATIONS AND VOICES.
CHLORPROMAZINE
AND ITS PIONEERING DOCTORS
RECEIVE WIDE NOTICE IN FRANCEOP
E
AND ACROSS THE ATLANTIC
IN NORTH AMERICA
WHERE PSYCHIATRIST HEINZ LEHMANN
FIRST HEARS ABOUT IT.
Lehmann:
I HEARD ABOUT IT
THROUGH AN ARROGANT...
WHAT I THOUGHT THEN TO BE
AN ARROGANT AND UTTERLY
UNFOUNDED STATEMENT
FROM THE DETAIL MAN
OF A PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY.
USUALLY I THREW
THIS LITERATURE AWAY
BUT THOSE I TOOK UP THE NEXT
TIME I HAD TIME FOR READING
AND THAT WAS ON A SUNDAY MORNING
IN THE BATHTUB.
ON NURSES
AT HIS HOSPITAL IN CANADA.
THIS IS COMMON PRACTICE
IN THIS PRE-SPUTNIK ERA
OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH.
AFTER THAT,
HIS PSYCHOTIC PATIENTS.
Lehmann:
AFTER TWO WEEKS
TWO OF THE PATIENTS
WENT INTO REMISSION--
WERE COMPLETELY FREE
OF SYMPTOMS.
NOW, THAT I'D NEVER SEEN.
IT ISN'T
IN THE TEXTBOOKS EITHER
AND IT WAS WHAT
THE FRENCH HAD DESCRIBED.
UM... I DIDN'T BELIEVE IT.
I THOUGHT IT WAS A FLUKE.
BUT THEN, AFTER
THREE OR FOUR WEEKS
QUITE A FEW MORE PATIENTS
WERE SYMPTOM-FREE.
WE HAD SOMETHING THAT WOULD
TURN IT OFF LIKE A WATER TAP.
SYMPTOMS WOULD DISAPPEAR
WHETHER YOU
UNDERSTOOD THEM OR NOT
NO MATTER WHAT THE DYNAMICS
MIGHT HAVE BEEN.
IT WAS LIKE TAKING AN ASPIRIN
FOR A TOOTHACHE--
IT JUST CUT IT OFF.
IT DIDN'T CURE THE TOOTHACHE
OR THE BAD TOOTH
BUT THE SYMPTOMS
DISAPPEARED COMPLETELY.
Osgood:
IT IS A NEW KIND OF TREATMENT:
A MEDICATION FOR THE MIND.
BEFORE, THEY HAD
ONLY BARBITURATES
WHICH WOULD KNOCK PATIENTS OUT.
NOW THEY HAVE A DRUG
THAT REDUCES PSYCHOSIS
WITHOUT REDUCING THE LEVEL
OF CONSCIOUSNESS.
IT IS A WHOLE NEW KIND
OF PHARMACY--
ONE THAT SEEMS TO TARGET
JUST THE DISEASE.
IN A SENSE, THE DRUG
TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
HAPPENED LIKE ALL OF THE
TREATMENTS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA--
THAT YOU ARE WORKING
FROM DESPERATION
AND IF SOMETHING LOOKS
LIKE IT MIGHT MAKE AN EFFECT
YOU TRY IT
BECAUSE YOU HAVEN'T GOT
ANYTHING TO LOSE.
AND SO THEY TRIED IT,
AND THIS TIME IT... IT WORKED.
Osgood:
AND CHLORPROMAZINE
IS JUST THE BEGINNING.
FROM PILLS FOR THE SEVERELY
MENTALLY ILL
TO TRANQUILIZERS
FOR THE MILDLY ANXIOUS.
FROM LITHIUM AND RESERPINE
IN THE 1950s
TO MILTOWN AND VALIUM
BY THE 1960s.
MEDICATIONS FOR THE MIND BECOME
A NEW PART OF AMERICAN LIFE.
HOW ANY OF THESE DRUGS WORK,
NO ONE KNOWS AT FIRST.
BUT THERE'S NO DOUBT
THAT SOMEHOW THE DRUGS CHANGE
BEHAVIOR BY ALTERING THE BRAIN.
THE BRAIN IS THE KEY.
THE PSYCHOTROPIC DRUGS
HAD EFFECTIVELY BEEN
DISCOVERED EMPIRICALLY.
NO ONE KNEW WHY THEY WORKED,
BUT THEY DID WORK.
SO THE NEXT QUESTION WAS:
WHY DID THEY WORK?
Osgood:
IN LABORATORIES
ALL OVER THE WORLD
FROM SWEDEN TO THE UNITED STATES
SCIENTISTS ARE TRYING
TO ANSWER THIS QUESTION.
SOLOMON SNYDER IS ONE OF THEM.
IN 1975,
SNYDER AND HIS COLLEAGUES EMBARK
ON A SERIES
OF ANIMAL EXPERIMENTS
AT JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY
TO SEE HOW CHLORPROMAZINE WORKS.
HE INJECTS RATS WITH THE DRUG
TO SEE HOW IT AFFECTS THE BRAIN.
WHAT HE DISCOVERS IS
A CHANGE IN BRAIN CHEMISTRY.
CHLORPROMAZINE SEEMS TO AFFECT
ONE CHEMICAL IN PARTICULAR
CALLED DOPAMINE.
THE BRAIN--
OF A RAT OR A HUMAN--
IS MADE UP OF THESE
KINDS OF CHEMICALS
CALLED NEUROTRANSMITTERS.
NEUROTRANSMITTERS
ALLOW BRAIN CELLS
TO COMMUNICATE WITH EACH OTHER,
MAKING UP AN INTRICATE NETWORK.
ULTIMATELY,
WHAT SNYDER'S EXPERIMENTS
AND OTHERS LIKE HIS SHOW
IS THAT THERE IS
AN INTIMATE CONNECTION
BETWEEN NEUROTRANSMITTERS
AND BEHAVIOR.
BETDOPAMINE IS LINKEDTERS
WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA.
OTHER EXPERIMENTS LINK
THE NEUROTRANSMITTER SEROTONIN
WITH DEPRESSION...
ACETYLCHOLINE WITH MEMORY.
IN FACT, THESE NEUROTRANSMITTERS
AND THE CHEMICAL REACTIONS
THEY PRODUCE IN THE BRAIN
ARE WHAT CAUSE BEHAVIOR,
NORMAL AND ABNORMAL.
THE REALIZATION
THAT THE BRAIN WORKS
ON THE BASIS OF CHEMICAL SIGNALS
WHICH ARE DYNAMIC
AND WHICH ARE
CHANGING ALL THE TIME
REPRESENTED A MAJOR REVOLUTION
IN BIOLOGY
IN BIOLOGYS ANALOGOUS
TO THE REVOLUTION THAT GALILEO
USHERED IN CENTURIES AGO.
NO LONGER COULD
WE REGARD THE BRAIN
AS AN UNCHANGING,
IMMUTABLE SWITCHBOARD
WITH WHICH WE WERE
BLESSED OR CURSED FOREVER.
THE CHEMICAL HYPOTHESIS OF BRAIN
FUNCTION AND BRAIN MESSAGES
MEANT THAT WE COULD
UNDERSTAND BEHAVIOR
AND THAT WE MIGHT
BE ABLE TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR.
THE DISCOVERY THAT
WE ARE PEOPLE WITH BRAINS
AND THAT BRAINS ARE REGULATED
BY VARIOUS BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
HAS CERTAINLY SHAKEN
THE OLDER VIEW
THAT WE REALLY
ARE SPIRITUAL BEINGS
AND THAT BRAINS BE DAMNED.
THEY'RE JUST KIND
OF THE HARDWARE--
LIKE OUR MUSCLES
AND OUR HEART, ETC.--
THAT WE NEED
TO BE SPIRITUAL BEINGS.
THE FACT THAT WE KNOW
THAT WE HAVE BRAINS
AND THAT WE CAN RADICALLY
INFLUENCE THE WAY WE THINK
BY INGESTION
OF CERTAIN CHEMICALS--
CERTAIN PURE CHEMICALS
THAT WE KNOW THE IDENTITY OF--
HAS REALLY CHANGED
OUR CONCEPTION OF OURSELVES
AND THERE'S NO GOING BACK.
MUCH AS SOME MIGHT WISH IT,
THERE IS NO GOING BACK AT ALL.
THE CHEMICAL REVOLUTION
OF THE 1970s
BEGETS A WHOLE NEW
BIOLOGY OF BEHAVIOR--
A BIOLOGY OF THOUGHT,
A BIOLOGY OF EMOTION.
SOME SCIENTISTS
BEGIN TO ASK THIS:
IF THE BRAIN CAN BE PHYSICALLY
CHANGED BY PILLS LIKE THESE
CAN IT ALSO BE CHANGED
JUST BY EXPERIENCE?
ONE ANSWER COMES
FROM THIS UNASSUMING
CREATURE, A SEA SLUG.
ITS ANATOMY IS
A WORLD APART FROM OURS
BUT ITS BIOCHEMISTRY
IS SIMILAR ENOUGH
TO RUN A CRUCIAL EXPERIMENT.
BEGINNING IN THE 1970s
WORK WITH SLUGS DEMONSTRATES
THAT IT IS POSSIBLE
TO PHYSICALLY CHANGE
THE BRAIN'S BIOCHEMISTRY
JUST THROUGH LEARNING;
THAT THE BRAIN DOES, IN FACT,
RESPOND TO EXPERIENCE
AND IS ACTUALLY CHANGED BY IT.
OF COURSE, A SLUG IS...
WELL, JUST A SLUG, NOT A PERSON
BUT IT DOES PROVE
THAT EXPERIENCE CAN NEVER
AGAIN BE SO EASILY DIVORCED
FROM BIOLOGY.
IT'S THE BEGINNING
OF A NEW, REVOLUTIONARY WAY
OF THINKING ABOUT BEHAVIOR--
A NEW SYNTHESIS, PUTTING
TO REST THE OLD DICHOTOMY
BETWEEN NATURE AND NURTURE--
A SYNTHESIS THAT WOULD
EVEN INCLUDE GENETICS.
(choir singing
Handel's "Messiah")
Osgood:
SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH.
HOME TO THE MORMON CHURCH
WHICH HAS ATTRACTED SETTLERS
FOR OVER A HUNDRED YEARS.
A TIGHT-KNIT COMMUNITY
THE MORMONS PROVIDE A NATURAL
LABORATORY FOR GENETICISTS
LOOKING TO SEE
HOW TRAITS ARE PASSED
FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION.
IN THE 1970s, THE CHURCH DECIDED
TO OPEN ITS DOORS TO SCIENTISTS
SHARING ITS VAST
GENEALOGICAL RECORDS.
MORMON LEADERS DID TWO THINGS
FOR WHICH GENETICISTS
WILL FOREVER BE THANKFUL.
NCOURAGED THEIR FOLLOWERS
FOR WHICH GENETICISTS
TO BE FRUITFUL AND MULTIPLYY E
AND, AS PART OF CHURCH PRACTICE
THEY URGED THEM TO KEEP
FASTIDIOUS RECORDS
OF THEIR FAMILY HISTORIES.
SOME GO BACK
AS FAR AS 150 YEARS.
THIS IS HOW HUMAN GENETICS
HAS BEEN STUDIED
THROUGHOUT THE CENTURY--
MAKING INFERENCES ABOUT
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE
BY STUDYING THE ANCESTRY
OF LARGE FAMILIES.
THIS IS HOW THE INHERITANCE
OF DISEASES
LIKE A FATAL BLOOD DISORDER
FOUND AMONG MORMONS
IS TRACKED.
OR THE INHERITANCE
OF BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS
LIKE MANIC DEPRESSION, SEEN
AMONG THE AMISH IN PENNSYLVANIA.
ALL THIS WOULD CHANGE
BY THE 1980s.
SCIENTISTS NO LONGER HAVE TO
RELY SOLELY ON FAMILY RECORDS
TO UNDERSTAND GENETICS.
THEY HAVE DISCOVERED WAYS TO
WORK WITH THE GENES THEMSELVES.
THEY CAN WORK WITH DNA-- THE
MATERIAL THAT MAKES UP GENES
THAT CARRIES THE BLUEPRINT
FOR HOW EACH OF US DEVELOPS
THAT PROVIDES
THE GENETIC INSTRUCTIONS
DIRECTING OUR BRAIN CHEMISTRY.
SCIENTISTS,
LIKE WALTER GILBERT AT HARVARD
AND DAVID BOTSTEIN AT M.I.T.
DEVELOPED METHODS TO DECIPHER
THE 100,000 GENES
IN EACH ONE OF US.
THIS ENABLES GENETICISTS
TO DETECT PATTERNS--
THE DNA SEQUENCES THAT
MAKE INDIVIDUALS DIFFERENT.
SCIENTISTS CAN NOW PICK OUT
AN ANOMALOUS GENE, A MUTATION.
THEY CAN SEARCH FOR GENES
THAT CAUSE DISEASES
LIKE CYSTIC FIBROSIS;
OR ONES THAT CONTRIBUTE
TO BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS
LIKE DEPRESSION
OR ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE.
Man:
HAVING THE TECHNOLOGY
LED TO A VERY HIGH LEVEL
OF EXCITEMENT
AMONG THE PEOPLE IN THE FIELD
WHO WERE COLLECTING FAMILIES
AND STUDYING THE PATTERNS
OF INHERITANCE
BECAUSE NOW THEY WERE ABLE
TO TAKE ALL THE INFORMATION
THAT THEY HAD
PUT IT TOGETHER WITH
THE MODERN GENETIC TECHNOLOGY
AND ACTUALLY FIND A NE.
Osgood:
THE POWER OF THIS NEW
DNA TECHNOLOGY
IS FELT IN UTAH, IN PENNSYLVANIA
EVEN AS FAR AWAY
AS THE MOUNTAINS
OF COLOMBIA IN SOUTH AMERICA
WHERE IN 1984
A CHANCE ENCOUNTER BETWEEN
NEUROLOGIST FRANCISCO LOPERA
AND A CONFUSED
YOUNG COLOMBIAN PATIENT
LEADS TO A SEARCH FOR A GENE
FOR ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE.
Man:
SI, EN MIL NOVECIENTOS
OCHENTA Y CUATRO...
Translator:
IN 1984, A PATIENT
FROM VELMIRA CAME HERE
WITH SYMPTOMS OF PROGRESSIVE
MENTAL DISORDER AND DEMENTIA.
IT CAUGHT OUR ATTENTION
THAT HE WAS SO YOUNG
AND WERE ABLE TO PIECE TOGETHERE
WENT TO VELMIRA
NINE OTHER CASES
OF SICK PEOPLE IN THAT FAMILY.
Osgood:
IN TOWN AFTER TOWN,
DR. LOPERA HEARS STORIES
OF OTHERS WITH ALZHEIMER'S,
INCLUDING LEONARDO PIEDRAHITA
WHHE MARKET
WITH HIS DAUGHTER AND GRANDSON.
LEONARDO WAS DIAGNOSED
WITH ALZHEIMER'S AT AGE 42--
IN THE PRIME OF LIFE.
GETTING ALZHEIMER'S
THIS YOUNG IS RARE.
95% OF THE TIME,
THE DISEASE STRIKES MUCH LATER
SOMETIMES AS MUCH
AS 20 TO 30 YEARS LATER.
THIS DISEASE EMERGES
SOMETIMES AS MUCH
AS 2SO EARLY IN LIFETER.WHY
IS A MYSTERY TO THE TOWNSPEOPLE.
SOME VERY INTERESTING IDEAS
ABOUT THIS D
WHY ONE PERSON WOULD GET THE
DISEASE AND ANOTHER WOULD NOT.
AND ONE OF THE IDEAS WHICH
ACTUALLY WAS QUITE INTERESTING
WAS THAT SOME FAMILIES BELIEVED
THAT IF THEY TOUCHED
A CERTAIN TREE IN A VILLAGE
THEY WOULD GET THE DISEASE
BUT THEY DIDN'T KNOW WHICH TREE.
NO ERA UNA CREENCIA
DE TODAS LAS PERSONAS
PERO SI HABIA ALGUNAS PERSONAS
QUE TENIAN ESA IDEA.
Translator:
NOT EVERYONE BELIEVED THAT,
BUT SOME DID.
BUT OTHERS THOUGHT IT WAS
A PUNISHMENT FROM GOD
AND A FEW THOUGHT
IT WAS HEREDITARY
BECAUSE THEY HAD OBSERVED
THAT A GOOD NUMBER
OF FAMILY MEMBERS GOT SICK.
THEY CALLED IT
"THE IDIOCY OF OUR FAMILY."
...DE NUESTRA FAMILIA.
EL TRES CON EL CUATRO.
SIGUE.
Osgood:
ALZHEIMER'S IS DEVASTATING
REGARDLESS
OF WHO GETS IT OR WHY.
LEONARDO'S DISEASE
IS SO ADVANCED
HE CANNOT EVEN PERFORM
THE SIMPLEST OF MENTAL TASKS.
PERO ES QUE NO VEO... OJALA.
NO, NO, NO.
Lopera:
PEGUE EL DOS
CON EL TRES.
EL DOS CON EL TRES.
SI, SI.
Osgood:
THIS DISEASE OF THE BRAIN ROBS
PEOPLE OF THEIR MEMORIES
THEIR MINDS AND ULTIMATELY
THEIR PERSONALITIES.
CON UNA LINEA.
PERO EN ANGOSTURA TAMBIEN
TENEMOS UNA FAMILIA
QUE LES EMPIEZA
A LOS 61 ANOS.
Osgood:
KEN KOSIK IS A NEUROBIOLOGIST
WHO HAS COME FROM BOSTON
TO COLLABORATE WITH LOPERA
BECAUSE OF THE UNIQUE
POPULATION IN COLUMBIA.
THEIR FOCUS IS AN ISOLATED
REGION CALLED ANTIOQUIA
WHERE THERE'S
AN EXTRAORDINARY CONCENTRATION
OF PATIENTS LIKE LEONARDO
WITH EARLY-ONSET ALZHEIMER'S
WHICH MAKES IT
A NATURAL LABORATORY
TO STUDY THE GENETICS
OF THE DISEASE.
Woman:
ROCIO.
Man:
Osgood:
LOPERA'S TEAM MEETS
WITH THE PIEDRAHITAS
TO MAP THEIR GENEALOGY.
EH... NO.
AH, PERO, OSEA NO, SIN CONTAR
LOS QUE HAY MUERTOS YA?
Osgood:
LEONARDO'S CHILDREN REPORT
THAT THEIR GRANDFATHER
ALSO HAD ALZHEIMER'S
AS DID THREE OF THEIR UNCLES,
ALL BEFORE THE AGE OF 50.
THEIRS IS ONLY
ONE OF 12 EXTENDED FAMILIES
IN THIS REGION--
4,000 PEOPLE IN ALL--
TOUCHED BY THE ILLNESS.
LOPERA'S TEAM TRACES THEIR
LINEAGE BACK SIX GENERATIONS
TO SPAIN IN THE 1780s.
IN THE PROCESS,
THE TEAM DISCOVERS SOMETHING
EVEN THE FAMILIES THEMSELVES
DID NOT KNOW:
THESE FAMILIES ARE ALL RELATED.
THEY ALL SHARE
THE SAME GENETIC INHERITANCE
WHICH THE SCIENTISTS SURMISE
MUST ALSO INCLUDE
A GENETIC PREDISPOSITION
FOR THIS RARE FORM
OF ALZHEIMER'S.
WHEN WE BEGAN
THIS SEARCH FOR A GENE
WE KNEW THERE WAS
A GENE CAUSING THIS PROBLEM
AND IT WAS VERY, VERY CLEAR.
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN CLEAR
100 YEARS AGO
BECAUSE IT WAS OBVIOUS
THAT THE GENE WAS INHERITED
GENERATION AFTER GENERATION
AND IT WAS EQUALLY PREVALENT
IN MEN AND WOMEN
AND IT WAS ALSO THE CASE
THAT ABOUT 50% OF THE OFFSPRING
WOULD GET THE ILLNESS;
ARE TEXTBOOK FEATURES
THAT ABOUT 50% OF THE OFFSPRING
OF A GENETIC ILLNESS.;THOSE
SO WE KNEW
THERE WAS A GENE HERE.
THERE WAS NO PROBLEM WITH THAT.
THE PROBLEM WAS
TO FIND THAT GENE.
DE QUE?
DUELE UN POQUITO.
Osgood:
FIRST, RESEARCHER
LUCIA MADRIGAL GATHERS
BLOOD SAMPLES FROM LEONARDO
AND ALL THE OTHER MEMBERS
OF THIS GREAT EXTENDED FAMILY.
THEN, USING
MODERN DNA TECHNIQUES
THEY SEARCH
FOR THE CULPRIT GENE.
WHILE LOPERA'S TEAM SEARCHES,
SO DO OTHER SCIENTISTS
STUDYING FAMILY GROUPS
IN OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD.
IN 1995, A GROUP
OF CANADIAN SCIENTISTS
IS THE FIRST TO SUCCEED.
THEY FIND AND ISOLATE THE GENE
RESPONSIBLE
FOR INHERITED ALZHEIMER'S.
Kosik:
THIS MADE OUR WORK MUCH EASIER
WERE ABLE
Kosik:
THIS MADTO HONE IN ONCH EASIER
EXACTLY WHERE THIS MUTATION WAS
AND WE WERE ABLE
TO VERY RAPIDLY NOW FIND
WHICH PATIENTS IN MEDELLIN
CARRIED THE MUTATION
AND WHICH DID NOT.
Osgood:
FOR THOSE PATIENTS
WITH THE DEFECTIVE GENE
THE RESEARCHERS CAN CHART
THE COURSE OF ALZHEIMER'S
AS IT RAVAGES THE BRAIN--
SOMETIMES EVEN BEFORE
SYMPTOMS BECOME APPARENT
IN A PERSON'S BEHAVIOR.
EN TODOS ESTAN VEMOS
EL CEREBRO, VE?
EL CEREBRO,
EL CEREBRO...
SI.
ESOS VAN DE DERECHA
A IZQUIERDA...
Osgood:
ALL THIS IS POSSIBLE
BECAUSE OF ADVANCES
OVER THE PAST 20 YEARS
IN BRAIN-SCANNING TECHNOLOGY
ANOTHER MAJOR BREAKTHROUGH
IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
PERMITTING SCIENTISTS
TO PEER INSIDE THE LIVING BRAIN
AND SEE THE MIND AT WORK...
THE BRAIN IN ACTION.
THE GENE FOR EARLY-ONSET
ALZHEIMER'S HAS BEEN FOUND
WITHIN LEONARDO
PIEDRAHITA'S LIFETIME.
ESTA BIEN BONITA.
Osgood:
THERE IS EVEN A TEST
TO SEE WHICH OF HIS CHILDREN
HAS INHERITED THE GENE.
THERE ARE MEDICATIONS AVAILABLE
AND IN THE WORKS
TO TREAT
THIS DEVASTATING ILLNESS.
THIS IS A GIANT SCIENTIFIC LEAP
IN A SHORT TIME.
Osgood:
BUT HAVING THE GENE IS ONE THING
THE EMERGENCE
OF THE DISEASE ITSELF, ANOTHER.
SCIENTISTS ARE A LONG WAY OFF
FROM UNDERSTANDING
THE CASCADE OF EVENTS
THAT LEAD FROM A MISTAKE IN
THE GENE THAT YOU WERE BORN WITH
SE THAT EMERGES
THAT LEAD FROM A MISTAKE IN
THE GENE40 YEARS LATER.BORN WITH
A DISEASE THAT ATTACKS
THE QUALITIES IN US
THAT ARE MOST HUMAN.
Harrington:
THE POWER OF LOOKING AT
ALZHEIMER'S AS A CASE STUDY HERE
IS THAT IT REALLY GIVES
YOU AN OPPORTUNITY
TO SEE HOW YOU CAN STUDY HUMAN
BEHAVIOR FROM SOUP TO NUTS--
FROM THE GENETIC LEVEL
THROUGH THE BRAIN LEVEL
TO THE BEHAVIOL,
TO THE EXPERIENTIAL LEVEL
AND BACK DOWN
THE OTHER DIRECTION--
AND TO DO IT AROUND A...
AN AREA OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE
TICAL
TO OUR UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT WE'RE ALL ABOUT:
OUR CAPACITY TO REMEMBER
TO REMEMBER
THE STORY OF OUR LIVES.
Osgood:
GENETICISTS WON A GREAT VICTORY
WHEN THEY DISCOVERED ONE GENE
FOR RARE FAMILIAL ALZHEIMER'S
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO THE MORE
COMMON OLD-AGE VARIETY
IT'S A DIFFERENT STORY.
SCIENTISTS ARE IDENTIFYING
MULTIPLE GENES--
GENES THAT DON'T NECESSARILY
LEAD TO THE DISEASE
BUT PUT PEOPLE AT RISK
FOR DEVELOPING IT.
THE SAME HOLDS TRUE FOR OTHER
MENTAL OR BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS
SUCH AS SCHIZOPHRENIA--
AS COMMON TODAY
AS IT WAS IN THE 1950s.
HERE, TOO, MULTIPLE RISK GENES
MAY BE RESPONSIBLE.
AND LIFE EXPERIENCE MAY
ALSO PLAY A ROLE.
FOR EXAMPLE, BEING
SEVERELY MALNOURISHED
DURING PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT
MAY TRIGGER
SCHIZOPHRENIA YEARS LATER.
IDEAS ABOUT THE CAUSES OF HUMAN
BEHAVIOR CONTINUE TO BE REFINED
AS IN THE CASE
OF SHELL SHOCK, FOR EXAMPLE...
TODAY CALLED
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.
WHY DO SOME SOLDIERS BREAK DOWN
WHILE OTHERS CAN WITHSTAND
THE HORRORS AROUND THEM?
SCIENTISTS NOW SPECULATE
THAT SOME ARE MORE SUSCEPTIBLE
PERHAPS GENETICALLY PREDISPOSED
TO SUCCUMB
TO THE TRAUMAS OF WAR.
AND YET THESE SOLDIERS STILL
NEED THE TRIGGER OF COMBAT
TO CAUSE THEIR BREAKDOWN--
BIOLOGYANDEXPERIENCE.
MOST SITUATIONS, HOWEVER,
ARE NOT AS RADICAL AS WAR
AND MOST BEHAVIORS ARE
NOT AS EXTREME
AS SHELL SHOCK
OR SCHIZOPHRENIA.
IT IS IN THE MORE ROUTINE
ENCOUNTERS OF EVERYDAY LIFE
THAT SCIENTISTS
OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR WILL FIND
THEIR GREATEST CHALLENGE.
THE MORE WE LEARN ABOUT
OUR BIOLOGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT
THE MORE WE REALIZE
HOW DIFFICULT IT IS
TO UNDERSTAND THEIR INTERPLAY.
Kosik:
SCIENTISTS HAVE MADE ENORMOUS
PROGRESS IN THE PAST CENTURY.
WE KNOW NEARLY ALL OF OUR GENES.
WE KNOW A LOT
ABOUT THE MOLECULES IN THE BRAIN
AND HOW THEY WORK
AND HOW THEY BUILD A BRAIN.
WE KNOW A BIT ABOUT
HOW THE ENVIRONMENT INTERFACES
WITH THESE GENES
AND THE MOLECULES
TO ACTUALLY AFFECT
THEIR EXPRESSION.
WHAT THE CHALLENGE IS
FOR SCIENTISTS NOW
IS TO UNDERSTAND HOW ALL
OF THESE MOLECULES AND GENES
AND ENVIRONMENT WORK TOGETHER
TO BUILD SOMETHING
AS COMPLEX AS HUMAN BEHAVIOR
WHICH IS CLEARLY MORE
THAN THE SUM OF THE PARTS.
THAT'S REALLY THE CHALLENGE
OF THE 21st CENTURY.